# Tafsir Ibn Kathir (Darussalam abridged English, Vol 1) — Q001
# Source: archive.org/details/tafsir-ibn-kathir-10.-Volumes
# Note: Vol 1 covers Q1 + Q2:1-252. Q002 file is partial (verses 1-252 of 286).

Surat  Al-Fatihah 
(Chapter  1) 

Which  was  revealed  in  Makkah 

The  Meaning  of  Al- 

Fatihah  and  its 

« 

Various  Names 

This  Surah  is  called 
Al-Fatihah ,  that  is, 
the  Opener  of  the 
Book,  the  Surah  with 
which  prayers  are 
begun.  It  is  also 
called,  Umm  Al-Kitab 
(the  Mother  of  the 
Book),  according  to 
the  majority  of  the 
scholars .  In  an 
authentic  Hadith 
recorded  by  At- 
Tirmidhi,  who  graded 
it  S  a  h  ih  ,  Abu 
Hurayrah  said  that 
the  Messenger  of 
Allah  said, 

jiidi 

«AI-Ha>ndu  lilldhi  Rabbil-'Alamin  is  the  Mother  of  the  Qur’an, 
the  Mother  of  the  Book,  and  the  seven  repeated  Ayat  of  the 
Glorious  Qur'an .» 

It  is  also  called  Al-Hamd  and  As-Salah,  because  the  Prophet 
5^  said  that  his  Lord  said, 


42 


Ta/sfr  Ibn  Kathir 


«'77»e  prayer  (i.e.,  Al-Fatihah)  is  divided  into  two  halves 
between  Me  and  My  servants."  When  the  servant  says,  "All 
praise  is  due  to  Allah,  the  Lord  of  existence,"  Allah  says,  "My 
servant  has  praised  Me.'®11* 

Al-Fatihah  was  called  the  Salah,  because  reciting  it  is  a 
condition  for  the  correctness  of  Salah  -  the  prayer.  Al-F&tihah 
was  also  called  Ash-Shifa’  (the  Cure). 

It  is  also  called  Ar-Ruqyah  (remedy),  since  in  the  Sahih,  there 
is  the  narration  of  Abu  Said  telling  the  the  stoiy  of  the 
Companion  who  used  Al-Fatihah  as  a  remedy  for  the  tribal 
chief  who  was  poisoned.  Later,  the  Messenger  of  Allah  said 
to  a  Companion,  „ .  . 

*How  did  you  know  that  it  is  a  Ruqyah?^ 

Al-Fatihah  was  revealed  in  Makkah  as  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Qatadah 
and  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  stated.  Allah  said, 

io£ )>  «  C 

iAnd  indeed.  We  have  bestowed  upon  you  the  seven  Mathanty 
(seven  repeatedly  recited  verses),  (i.e.  Surat  Al-Fatihah ) 
(15:87).*3*  Allah  knows  best. 

How  many  Ayat  does  Al-Fatihah  contain? 

There  is  no  disagreement  over  the  view  that  Al-Fatihah 
contains  seven  Ayat.  According  to  the  majority  of  the  reciters 
of  Al-Kufah,  a  group  of  the  Companions,  the  Tabi'in,  and  a 
number  of  scholars  from  the  successive  generations,  the 
Bismtlldh  is  a  separate  Ayah  in  its  beginning.  We  will  mention 
this  subject  again  soon,  if  Allah  wills,  and  in  Him  we  trust. 

The  Number  of  Words  and  Letters  in  Al-Fatihah 

The  scholars  say  that  Al-Fatihah  consists  of  twenty-five 
words,  and  that  it  contains  one  hundred  and  thirteen  letters. 

^ 1  *  At-Tirmidhi ,  Tutifat  Al-Ahwadhi  8 :283 . 

121  Path  Al-Bari  4 :529 . 

[31 

That  is,  because  this  Ayah ,  which  refers  to  Al-Fdtihah,  was  itself 
revealed  in  Makkah. 


43 


Surah  1.  Al-Fatihah  (Part-1) 


The  Reason  it  is  called  Umm  Al-Kitab 


In  the  beginning  of  the  Book  of  Tafsir,  in  his  SahOi,  Al- 
Bukhari  said;  “It  is  called  Umm  Al-Kitab,  because  the  Qur’an 
starts  with  it  and  because  the  prayer  is  started  by  reciting 
it.”111  It  was  also  said  that  it  is  called  Umm  Al-Kitab,  because 
it  contains  the  meanings  of  the  entire  Qur’an.  Ibn  Jarir  said, 
“The  Arabs  call  every  comprehensive  matter  that  contains 
several  specific  areas  an  Umm.  For  instance,  they  call  the  skin 
that  surrounds  the  brain,  Umm  Ar-Ra’s.  They  also  call  the  flag 
that  gathers  the  ranks  of  the  army  an  Umm.”  He  also  said, 
“Makkah  was  called  Umm  Al-Qura,  (the  Mother  of  the  Villages) 
because  it  is  the  grandest  and  the  leader  of  all  villages.  It  was 
also  said  that  the  earth  was  made  starting  from  Makkah.”121 

Further,  Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  narrated 
about  Umm  Al-Qur’an  that  the  Prophet  said, 


«Zt  is  Umm  Al-Qur'dti,  the  seven  repeated  (verses)  and  the 
Glorious  Qur'an. »131 


Also,  Abu  JaTar,  Muhammad  bin  Jarir  At-Tabari  recorded 
Abu  Hurayrah  saying  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  said  about 
Al-Fatihah, 


I  /yA J  t _ ’ USvl I  4>y  U  <L>^ ^ 1 


a/t  is  Umm  Al-Qur'an,  Al-Fdtihah  of  the  Book  (the  Opener  of 
the  Qur'an)  and  the  seven  repeated  (verses)  .»|41 


Virtues  of  Al-Fatihah 

• 

Imam  Ahmad  bin  Hanbal  recorded  in  the  Musnad  that  Abu 
Said  bin  Al-Mu‘alla  said,  “I  was  praying  when  the  Prophet 
called  me,  so  I  did  not  answer  him  until  I  finished  the  prayer.  I 
then  went  to  him  and  he  said,  "'What  prevented  you  from 
coming ?»  I  said,  ’O  Messenger  of  Allah  !  I  was  praying.’  He  said, 
«' Didn't  Allah  say», 

111  FathAl-Bari  8:6. 

121  At-Tabari  1 :107. 

131  Ahmad  2 :448 . 

141  At-Tabari  1 :107. 


44 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


i'^4-  Q  pz  4  JAft  A  £c  «ii  i&> 


40  you  who  believe!  Answer  Allah  (by  obeying  Him)  and  (His) 
Messenger  when  he  ($g)  calls  you  to  that  which  gives  you  life?} 
He  si;  then  said, 


^  M  j 5  j  j Ja\ 


«/  will  teach  you  the  greatest  Surah  in  the  Qur'an  before  you  leave  the 
MasjidJ  He  held  my  hand  and  when  he  was  about  to  leave  the 
Masjid,  I  said,  ‘O  Messenger  of  Allah!  You  said:  I  will  teach  you 
the  greatest  Surah  in  the  Qur’an.’  He  said,  «Yes.» 


<~o  fi  ^} 


n Al-Hamdu  lillahi  Rabbil-'Alamtm” 


o«jjl  t^aJl 


«/i  is  the  seven  repeated  (verses)  and  the  Glorious  Qur'an  that  l 
was  given. n”^11 

Al-Bukhari,*2*  Abu  Dawud,  An-Nasal  and  Ibn  Majah131  also 
recorded  this  Hadith. 

Also,  Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said,  “The 
Messenger  of  Allah  3^5  went  out  while  Ubayy  bin  Ka*b  was 
praying  and  said,  1 0  Ubayy!**  Ubayy  did  not  answer  him.  The 
Prophet  said,  «0  Ubayy 7*  Ubayy  prayed  faster  then  went  to 
the  Messenger  of  Allah  saying,  Teace  be  unto  you,  O 
Messenger  of  Allah!’  He  said,  «Peace  be  unto  you.  O  Ubayy,  what 
prevented  you  from  answering  me  when  I  called  you?**  He  said,  ‘O 
Messenger  of  Allah!  I  was  praying.’  He  said,  «Did  you  not  read 
among  what  Allah  has  sent  down  to  me  A 


4 Answer  Allah  (by  obeying  Him)  and  (His)  Messenger  when  he 
(jg)  calls  you  to  that  which  gives  you  life?} 

He  said,  “Yes,  O  Messenger  of  Allah!  I  will  not  do  it  again.’  the 
Prophet  said, 


111  Ahmad  4:211. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  8:6,271. 

131  Abu  Dawud  2  : 150 ,  An-Nasal  2 : 139 ,  and  Ibn  Majah  2 : 1244 . 


Surah  1.  Al-Fdtihah  (Portal} 


45 


%  J  %  j  *■>  5^'  J  'I 


idUf  M 

«?4iL  j 


tWould  you  like  me  to  teach  you  a  Surah  the  likes  of  which 
nothing  has  been  revealed  in  the  Tawrdh,  the  Injil,  the  Zabur 
(Psalms)  or  the  Furqan  (the  Qur'an)?* 


He  said,  *Yes,  O  Messenger  of  Allah!’  The  Messenger  of  Allah  sfe 
said,  «/  hope  that  I  will  not  leave  through  this  door  until  you  have 
learned  it.*  He  (Ka*b)  said,  The  Messenger  of  Allah  held  my 
hand  while  speaking  to  me.  Meanwhile  I  was  slowing  down 
fearing  that  he  might  reach  the  door  before  he  finished  his 
conversation.  When  we  came  close  to  the  door,  I  said:  O 
Messenger  of  Allah  !  What  is  the  Surah  that  you  have  promised 
to  teach  me?’  He  said,  *What  do  you  read  in  the  prayer .*  Ubayy 
said,  ‘So  I  recited  Umm  Al-Qur’&n  to  him.’  He  jg  said, 


Jt  Vj  i/.  Vj  Ji^X'  j  'ij  VjJM  J.  ^  i-hi 

« jddi  ^iii  \£\  41L 


*By  Him  in  Whose  Hand  is  my  soul!  Allah  has  never  revealed 
in  the  Tawrdh,  the  Injil,  the  Zabur  or  the  Furqan  a  Surah  like 
it.  It  is  the  seven  repeated  verses  that  I  was  given.*?” 

Also,  At-Tirmidhi  recorded  this  Hadith  and  in  his  narration, 
the  Prophet  said, 

gLi\ 

nit  is  the  seven  repeated  verses  and  the  Glorious  Qur’an  that  I  was 
given.*  At-Tirmidhi  then  commented  that  this  Hadith  is  Hasan 
Sahih .*'* 

There  is  a  similar  Hadith  on  this  subject  narrated  from  Anas 
bin  Malik'2*  Further,  ‘Abdullah,  the  son  of  Imam  Ahmad, 
recorded  this  Hadith  from  Abu  Hurayrah  from  Ubayy  bin  Ka*b, 
and  he  mentioned  a  longer  but  similar  wording  for  the  above 
Hadith. *3*  In  addition,  At-Tirmidhi  and  An-Nasal  recorded  this 
Hadith  from  Abu  Hurayrah  from  Ubayy  bin  Ka*b  who  said  that 
the  Messenger  of  Allah  said, 


* 1 1  Ahmad  2  :4 12 ,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8  :283 . 
•2|  Al-Hakim  1:560. 

131  Ahmad  2 :357  and  5 : 1 1 4 . 


46 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


C/i)  £r~^'  ("'  ji?  Jr?“X'  </-  ?’ j J^1  Ji  <*’  L*' 


«Allah  has  never  revealed  in  the  Tawrdh  or  the  Injil  anything 
similar  to  Unvn  Al-Qur'dn.  It  is  the  seven  repeated  verses  and 
it  is  divided  into  hoo  halves  bchveen  Allah  and  His  servant .» 


This  is  the  wording  reported  by  An-Nasal.  At-Tirmidhi  said 
that  this  Hadith  is  Hasan  Gharib.’1’ 

Also,  Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Ibn  Jabir  said,  “I  went  to 
the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  after  he  had  poured  water  (for 
purification)  and  said,  ‘Peace  be  unto  you,  O  Messenger  of 
Allah!’  He  did  not  answer  me.  So  I  said  again,  ‘Peace  be  unto 
you,  O  Messenger  of  Allah!’  Again,  he  did  not  answer  me,  so  I 
said  again,  ‘Peace  be  unto  you,  O  Messenger  of  Allah!’  Still  he 
did  not  answer  me.  The  Messenger  of  Allah  sg  went  while  I  was 
following  him,  until  he  arrived  at  his  residence.  I  went  to  the 
Masjid  and  sat  there  sad  and  depressed.  The  Messenger  of 
Allah  sg  came  out  after  he  performed  his  purification  and  said, 
'‘Peace  and  Allah  s  mercy  be  utilo  you,  peace  and  Allah's  merc\ j  be 
unto  you,  peace  and  Allah's  mercy  be  unto  you.*  He  then  said*  «0 
'Abdullah  bin  Jabir!  Should  I  inform  you  of  the  best  Surah  in  the 
Qur'an ?»  I  said,  Yes,  O  Messenger  of  Allah!’  He  said,  "Read,  'All 
praise  be  to  Allah,  the  Lord  of  the  existence,'  until  you  finish  if. 

This  Hadith  has  a  good  chain  of  narrators. 

Some  scholars  relied  on  this  Hadith  as  evidence  that  some 
Ayat  and  Surahs  have  more  virtues  than  others. 

Furthermore,  in  the  chapter  about  the  virtues  of  the  Qur’an, 
Al-Bukhari  recorded  that  Abu  Said  Al-Khudri  said,  “Once,  we 
were  on  a  journey  when  a  female  servant  came  and  said,  The 
leader  of  this  area  has  been  poisoned  and  our  people  are 
away.  Is  there  a  healer  among  you?’  Then  a  man  whose 
healing  expertise  did  not  interest  us  stood  for  her,  he  read  a 
Ruqyah  for  him,  and  he  was  healed.  The  chief  gave  him  thirty 
sheep  as  a  gift  and  some  milk.  When  he  came  back  to  us  we 
said  to  him.  You  know  of  a  (new)  Ruqyah ,  or  did  you  do  this 
before?’  He  said,  ‘I  only  used  Umm  Al-Kitdb  as  Ruqyah.’  We 


111  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi 8 :553  and  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  1:318. 
^  Ahmad  4:177  and  Al-Muwatta  1 :84. 


47 


Surah  1.  Al-Fdtihah  (Part-1) 


said,  ‘Do  not  do  anything  further  until  we  ask  the  Messenger 
of  Allah.’  When  we  went  back  to  Al-Madlnah  we  mentioned 
what  had  happened  to  the  Prophet  sg.  The  Prophet  sg  said. 


^  .J  1  yt* ...  *  1  aS  j  IL 1  Aj  jjb  0 15  UijB 


«W7/o  told  him  that  it  is  a  Ruqyah?  Divide  (the  sheep)  and 
reserve  a  share  far  me.””111 


Also,  Muslim  recorded  in  his  Sahiih,  and  An-Nasal  in  his 
Sunan  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “While  Jibril  (Gabriel)  was  with 
the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg,  he  heard  a  noise  from  above.  Jibril 
lifted  his  sight  to  the  sky  and  said,  This  is  a  door  in  heaven 
being  open,  and  it  has  never  been  opened  before  now.’  An  angel 
descended  from  that  door  and  came  to  the  Prophet  jg  and  said, 
‘Receive  the  glad  tidings  of  two  lights  that  you  have  been  given, 
which  no  other  Prophet  before  you  was  given:  the  Opening  of 
the  Book  and  the  last  (three)  Ayat  of  Surat  Al-Baqarah.  You  will 
not  read  a  letter  of  them,  but  will  gain  its  benefit.’  ”  This  is  the 
wording  collected  by  An-Nasal  (Al-Kubra  5:12)  and  Muslim 
recorded  similar  wording  (1:554). 


Al-Fatihah  and  the  Prayer 


Muslim  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  the  Prophet  sg 
said, 


^  iHj  £0>-  jl^ii  f\  i &  f>;  p  I'k*  JU 


« Whoever  performs  any  prayer  in  which  he  did  not  read  Umm 
Al-Qur’an,  then  his  prayer  is  incomplete  J  He  said  it  thrice. 


Abu  Hurayrah  was  asked,  “(When)  we  stand  behind  the 
Imam?”  He  said,  “Read  it  to  yourself,  for  I  heard  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  say, 


li(i  jli  U  li-UwJj  5 

:Jli  lip  J15  UJ  4Ji  JU-» 

:  iil  Jlj  t,  ^  ^y  :Jli  liji  4^jlp  •  <ul  JlS  *■ 


I  (J 


J* 

4ji  juSJ'  :Jli 


:  iil  Jlj  t,  ^  ^ y  :Jli  liji  4  :<ui  JlS  * 

jujw  A\i\  :Jtf  liti  (jxi-  ^Jl  JUj 

:  ju  li^  4jL  U  ^  lli  :Jli 


111  Fath  Al-Bari  8:671. 


48 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Jli  Vj  (*4^  _Aft  |*4^  o.  d#  o  '4$\ 

Kjtl  l*  I  la  ;4)t 


« Allah,  the  Exalted,  said,  7  have  divided  the  prayer  (Al- 
Fdtihah)  into  two  halves  between  Myself  and  My  servant,  and 
My  servant  shall  have  what  he  asks  for.’ 

If  he  says, 

«0J 

4AU  praise  and  thanks  be  to  Allah,  the  Lord  of  existence 
Allah  says,  'My  servant  has  praised  Me.'  When  the  servant  says, 

4The  Most  Gracious,  the  Most  Merciful. $ 

Allah  says,  'My  servant  has  glorified  Me.'  When  he  says, 


4The  Owner  of  the  Day  of  Recompense  .$ 

Allah  says,  'My  servant  has  glorified  Me,'  or  'My  servant  has  related 
all  matters  to  Me.'  When  he  says, 

4{SS^~— 1  JLu 

4You  (alone)  we  worship,  and  You  (alone)  we  ask  for  help.$ 

Allah  says,  'This  is  betxveen  Me  and  My  servant,  and  My  servant 
shall  acquire  what  he  sought.'  When  he  says, 


*  ff*  *  **•  *  ^  ^  ^ »  A  / 

C/j!' 


.  '  /  /  *  0  *  *  *+ 


iGuide  us  to  the  straight  path .  The  ivay  of  those  on  whom  You 
have  granted  Your  grace,  not  (the  zvay)  of  those  who  earned 
Your  anger,  nor  of  those  who  went  astray 

Allah  says,  'This  is  for  My  servant,  and  My  servant  shall  acquire 
what  he  asked  for 

These  are  the  words  of  An-Nasal,  while  both  Muslim  and 
An-Nasal  collected  the  following  wording,  “A  half  of  it  is  for  Me 
and  a  half  for  My  servant,  and  My  servant  shall  acquire  what 


Surah  1.  Al-Fdtihah  (Part-1 ) 
he  asked  for.”"1 


49 


Explaining  this  Hadith 


The  last  Hadith  used  the  word  [Salah]  ‘prayer’  in  reference  to 
reciting  the  Qur’an,  (Al-Fdtihah  in  this  case)  just  as  Allah  said 
in  another  Ayah, 


/  f  *++*  y  *  ft  <  <  z'  <y\ 


iAnd  offer  your  Salah  (prayer)  neither  aloud  nor  in  a  low 
voice,  but  follow  a  way  betioeen 

meaning,  with  your  recitation  of  the  Qur’an,  as  the  Sahih 
related  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas.’21  Also,  in  the  last  Hadith,  Allah  said, 
“I  have  divided  the  prayer  between  Myself  and  My  servant  into 
two  halves,  a  half  for  Me  and  a  half  for  My  servant.  My 
servant  shall  have  what  he  asked  for.”  Allah  next  explained 
the  division  that  involves  reciting  Al-Fdtihah,  demonstrating 
the  importance  of  reciting  the  Qur’an  during  the  prayer,  which 
is  one  of  the  prayer’s  greatest  pillars.  Hence,  the  word  ‘prayer’ 
was  used  here  although  only  a  part  of  it  was  actually  being 
referred  to,  that  is,  reciting  the  Qur’an.  Similarly,  the  word 
‘recite’  was  used  where  prayer  is  meant,  as  demonstrated  by 
Allah’s  statement, 


iAnd  recite  the  Qur'an  in  the  early  dawn.  Verily,  the  recitation  of  the 
Qur'an  in  the  early  dawn  is  ever  wihiessed.fy  in  reference  to  the 
Fajr  prayer.  The  Two  Sahlhs  recorded  that  the  angels  of  the 
night  and  the  day  attend  this  prayer.’3’ 


Reciting  Al-Fatihah  is  required  in  Every  Rak‘ah  of  the 
Prayer 

All  of  these  facts  testify  to  the  requirement  that  reciting  the 
Qur’an  (Al-Fatihah)  in  the  prayer  is  required,  and  there  is  a 
consensus  between  the  scholars  on  this  ruling.  The  Hadith 
that  we  mentioned  also  testifies  to  this  fact,  for  the  Prophet  jg 
said, 

"’  Muslim  1 :296 ,  and  An-Nasa’i  in  Al-Kubra  5:11,12. 

|2’  Fath  Al-Bari  8 :257 

’3|  Fath  Al-Bari  8 :251  and  Muslim  1 :439. 


50 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


^  r*  Sr*’ 


^Whoever  performs  any  prayer  in  which  he  did  not  recite  Umm 
Al-Qur'dn,  his  prayer  is  incomplete  V1' 

Also,  the  Two  Sahths  recorded  that  ‘Ubadah  bin  As-Samit 
said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 

toll  \%  jj  -fJ  ;>>u> 

«There  is  no  prayer  for  whoever  does  not  recite  the  Opening  of 
the  Book.*™  ‘ 


Also,  the  Sahihs  of  Ibn  Khuzaymah  and  Ibn  Hibban  recorded 
that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 

<oT ji i\  ft  ifei  fyi 

«77ie  prayer  during  which  Umm  Al-Qur'dn  is  not  recited  is 
invalid  jl* 


There  are  many  other  Hadtths  on  this  subject.  Therefore, 
reciting  the  Opening  of  the  Book,  during  the  prayer  by  the 
Imam  and  those  praying  behind  him,  is  required  in  every 
prayer,  and  in  every  Rak'ah. 


The  Tafsir  of  IstVadhah  (seeking  Refuge) 

Allah  said, 


Si  U \j 


iShow  forgiveness,  enjoin  what  is  good,  and  stay  away  from 
the  foolish  (i.e.  don't  punish  them).  And  if  an  evil  whisper 
comes  to  you  from  Shaytan  (Satatt),  then  seek  refuge  with 
Allah.  Verily,  He  is  Hearing,  Knowing ^  (7:199-200), 


*  A  r'  '  \'  'u  >  x  'u  '<'ri 


4 Repel  evil  with  that  which  is  better ,  We  are  Best-Acquainted 


Ahmad  2  :250. 

121  Fath  Al-Bdri  2 :276  and  Muslim  1 :295 . 

Ibn  Khuzaymah  1 :248,  and  Ibn  Hibban  3  :139. 


57 


Surah  2.  A  l -Fat  Utah  (Part-1) 


with  things  they  utter.  And  say:  " My  Lord!  I  seek  refuge  ivith 
You  from  the  whisperings  (suggestions)  of  the  Shaydtm  (devils) . 
And  I  seek  refuge  ivith  You,  My  Lord!  lest  they  should  come 
near  me."}  (23:96-98)  and, 


UJ  %  &  iyZ  'Ji  £3} 

J  ’ ■■■'*  Ji  fyj  rV  ^_kc-  JL»-  Jj  ^  Cy  i&i  "jl 

j  a  “if  r  - r- 


4  n  jL-Q'  ji  iii  4il 


iRepel  (an  evil)  ivith  one  which  is  better,  then  verily  he  with 
whom  there  ivas  enmity  behveen  you,  (will  become)  as  though 
he  was  a  close  friend.  But  none  is  granted  it  except  those  who 
are  patient  —  and  none  is  granted  it  except  the  oivner  of  the 
great  portion  (of  happiness  in  the  Hereafter,  i.e.  Paradise  and  of 
a  high  moral  character)  in  this  world.  And  if  an  evil  whisper 
from  Shay  tan  tries  to  turn  you  away  (O  Muhammad  sg)  (from 
doing  good),  then  seek  refuge  in  Allah.  Verily,  He  is  the 
Hearing,  the  Knowing.}  (41:34-36) 

These  are  the  only  three  Ayat  that  cariy  this  meaning.  Allah 
commanded  that  we  be  lenient  human  enemy,  so  that  his  soft 
nature  might  make  him  an  ally  and  a  supporter.  He  also 
commanded  that  we  seek  refuge  from  the  Satanic  enemy, 
because  the  devil  does  not  relent  in  his  enmity  if  we  treat  him 
with  kindness  and  leniency.  The  devil  only  seeks  the 
destruction  of  the  Son  of  Adam  due  to  the  vicious  enmity  and 
hatred  he  has  always  had  towards  man’s  father,  Adam.  Allah 
said. 


4& if  A  tr  Sftif  £41*  V  p:  &} 


40  Children  of  Adam!  Let  not  Shay  tan  deceive  you,  as  he  got 
your  parents  [Adam  and  Haimoa  (Eve)]  out  of  Paradise} 
(7:27), 


4Surely,  Shaytdn  is  an  enemy  to  you,  so  take  (treat)  him  as  an 
enemy.  He  only  invites  his  Hizb  (fblloivers)  that  they  may 
become  the  dwellers  of  the  blazing  Fire}  (35:6)  and, 


'*  .t  v 


52 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


iWill  you  then  take  him  (Iblfs)  and  his  offspring  as  protectors 
and  helpers  rather  than  Me  while  they  are  enemies  to  you? 
What  an  evil  is  the  exchange  far  the  Zalimun  (polytheists,  and 
wrongdoers,  etc)}  (18:50). 


The  devil  assured  Adam  that  he  wanted  to  advise  him,  but 
he  was  lying.  Hence,  how  would  he  treat  us  after  he  had 
vowed, 


i"By  Your  might,  then  I  will  surely,  tnislead  them  all.  Except 
Your  chosen  servants  among  them  (i.e.  faithful,  obedient,  true 
believers  of  Islamic  Monotheism).''}  (38:82-83) 


Also,  Allah  said, 


4 So  when  you  [ivant  to]  recite  the  Qur'an,  seek  refuge  with 
Allah  from  Shaytan,  the  outcast  (the  cursed  one).  Verily,  he 
has  no  power  over  those  who  believe  and  put  their  trust  only  in 
their  Lord  (Allah).  His  power  is  only  over  those  who  obey  and 
fallow  him  (Satan),  and  those  who  join  partners  with  Him.} 
(16:98-100). 


Seeking  Refuge  before  reciting  the  Qur'an 

Allah  said, 

^  XjC. — 'Is  ^ 


iSo  when  you  [want  to]  recite  the  Qur'an,  seek  refuge  with 
Allah  from  Shaytan,  the  outcast  (the  cursed  one).} 
meaning,  before  you  recite  the  Qur’an.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


jlCZjLj  ij&ii 


iWhen  you  intend  to  offer  As-Salah  (the  prayer),  wash  your 
faces  and  your  hands  (forearms)}  (5:6) 

meaning,  before  you  stand  in  prayer,  as  evident  by  the 
Hadiths  that  we  mentioned.  Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Abu 
Said  Al-Khudri  said,  “When  the  Messenger  of  Allah  would 


Surah  1.  Al-Fatihah  (Part-1) 


53 


stand  up  in  prayer  at  night,  he  would  start  his  prayer  with  the 
Takbir  (saying  “ AUahu  Akbar”;  Allah  is  Greater)  and  would  then 
supplicate, 


«il^  y'j  Vj  iil Jtij  lijdj  kiljL lAfj  jylji 


«All  praise  is  due  to  You,  O  Allah,  and  also  the  thanks. 
Blessed  be  Your  Name,  Exalted  be  Your  sovereignty,  and  there 
is  no  deity  worthy  of  worship  except  You . « 

He  jg  would  then  say  thrice, 

"J«i  vi  at  v» 


'‘There  is  no  deity  worthy  of  worship  except  Allah, ». 
He  would  then  say. 


jUalJLjl  |^UJl  -UJ L  i jf. It 


»/  seek  refuge  with  Alldlt,  the  Hearing,  the  Knowing,  from  the 
cursed  Satan,  from  his  coercion,  lures  to  arrogance  and 
poems  J.” 


The  four  collectors  of  the  Sunan  recorded  this  Hadith,  which 
At-Tirmidhi  considered  the  most  famous  Hadith  on  this 
subject.111 

Abu  Dawud  and  Ibn  Majah  recorded  that  Jubayr  bin  Mut'im 
said  that  his  father  said,  “When  the  Messenger  of  Allah 
started  the  prayer,  he  said, 


j  c  «3) l  ijl ~~  —  I <u  JLfcjdl  —  —  <d>l® 

^-ji  jUailji  ^  Jju.  lj!\  Ji  -  (Hi 


‘Allah  is  the  Greater,  truly  the  Greatest  (thrice);  all  praise  is 
due  to  Allah  always  (thrice);  and  all  praise  is  due  to  Allah  day 
and  night  (thrice).  O  Alldh!  1  seek  refuge  with  You  from  the 
cursed  Satan,  from  his  Harnz,  Nafkh  and  Nafth.*.” 

‘Amr  said,  “The  Harnz  means  asphyxiation,  the  Nafkh  means 
arrogance,  and  the  Nafth  means  poetry.”121  Also,  Ibn  Majah 
recorded  that  ‘Ali  bin  Al-Mundhir  said  that  Ibn  Fudayl 
narrated  that  ‘Ata’  bin  As-Sa’ib  said  that  Abu  ‘Abdur-Rahman 


111  Ahmad  3:69,  Abu  Dawud  1:490,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  2:47,  An- 
Nasal  2 : 132 ,  and  Ibn  Majah . 

121  Abu  Dawud  1 :486  and  Ibn  Majah  1 :265 . 


54 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathir 


As-Sulami  said  that  Ibn  Mas“ud  said  that  the  Prophet  jg  said, 


« jCbJ  jUa_ ill  '^jA  tlx>  i ^1 


«0  Allah!  I  seek  refuge  with  You  from  the  cursed  devil,  from 
his  Hamz,  Nafkh  and  Nafth .» 


He  said,  “The  Hamz  means  death,  the  Nafkh  means 
arrogance,  and  the  Nafth  means  poetry.”*1' 


Seeking  Refuge  with  Allah  when  One  is  Angry 

In  his  Musnad,  Al-Hafiz  Abu  Ya*la  Ahmad  bin  ‘Aii  bin  Al- 
Muthanna  Al-Mawsili  reported  that  Ubayy  bin  Ka*b  said,  “Two 
men  disputed  with  each  other  in  the  presence  of  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  and  the  nose  of  one  of  them  became 
swollen  because  of  extreme  anger.  The  Messenger  of  Allah  sg 
said, 


.^i  jikiji  ja  < i>t  i^t'  ^  U  Up  CSS!  iJli  ‘J  jUiV  Jl» 


«/  know  of  some  words  that  if  he  said  them,  what  he  feels  will 
go  away,  7  seek  refuge  with  Allah  from  the  cursed  Satan.'*” 


An-Nasal  also  recorded  this  Hadith  in  his  book,  Al-Yawm 
wal-LaylahP 

Al-Bukhari  recorded  that  Sulayman  bin  Surad  said,  “Two 
men  disputed  in  the  presence  of  the  Prophet  f§  while  we  were 
sitting  with  him.  One  of  them  was  cursing  the  other  fellow  and 
his  face  turned  red  due  to  anger.  The  Prophet  jg  said, 


jlkill  ^  ijl\  :JU  p  SjoC.  U  <S  CSS J  $  CIS  J\> 


Vr^1 

“/  know  of  a  statement  which  if  he  said  it,  will  make  wlwt  he 
feels  disappear,  7  seek  refuge  with  Allah  from  the  cursed 
Satan.'* 


They  said  to  the  man,  “Do  you  not  hear  what  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  is  saying?’  He  said,  7  am  not  insane.’”  Also,  Muslim, 
Abu  Dawud  and  An-Nasa’i  recorded  this  Hadith ,'3' 


111  Ibn  Majah  1 :266. 

*2'  An-Nasa’i  in  Al-Kubra,  no.  10233. 

*3'  Fath  Al-Bari  6:388,  Muslim  4:2015,  Abu  Dawud  5:140  and  An- 
Nasa’i  in  Al-Kubra. 


Surah  1.  Al-Fatihah  (Part-1 ) 


55 


There  are  many  other  HadUhs  about  seeking  refuge  with 
Allah.  One  can  find  this  subject  in  the  books  on  supplication 
and  the  virtues  of  righteous,  good  deeds. 

Is  the  Isti'adhah  (seeking  Refuge)  required? 

The  majority  of  the  scholars  state  that  reciting  the  Isti'adhah 
(in  the  prayer  and  when  reciting  the  Qur’an)  is  recommended 
and  not  required,  and  therefore,  not  reciting  it  does  not 
constitute  a  sin.  However,  Ar-Razi  recorded  that  ‘Ata’  bin  Abi 
Rabah  said  that  the  Isti'adhah  is  required  in  the  prayer  and 
when  one  reads  the  Qur’an.  In  support  of  ‘Ata’s  statement,  Ar- 
Razi  relied  upon  the  apparent  meaning  of  the  Ayah, 


iThen  seek  refuge.} 

He  said  that  the  Ayah  contains  a  command  that  requires 
implementation.  Also,  the  Prophet  3^5  always  said  the 
Isti'adhah.  In  addition,  the  Isti'adhah  wards  off  the  evil  of 
Satan,  which  is  neccessaiy,  the  rule  is  that  the  means  needed 
to  implement  a  requirement  of  the  religion  is  itself  also 
required.  And  when  one  says,  “I  seek  refuge  with  Allah  from  the 
cursed  devil.”  Then  this  will  suffice. 


Virtues  of  the  Isti'adhah 

The  Isti'adhah  cleanses  the  mouth  from  the  foul  speech  that 
it  has  indulged  in.  It  also  purifies  the  mouth  and  prepares  it 
to  recite  the  speech  of  Allah.  Further,  the  Isti'adhah  entails 
seeking  Allah’s  help  and  acknowledging  His  ability  to  do 
everything.  The  Isti'adhah  also  affirms  the  servant’s  meekness, 
weakness  and  inability  to  face  the  enemy  of  his  inner  evil, 
whom  Allah  alone,  Who  created  this  enemy,  is  able  to  repel 
and  defeat.  This  enemy  does  not  accept  kindness,  unlike  the 
human  enemy.  There  are  three  Ayat  in  the  Qur’an  that  affirm 
this  fact.  Also,  Allah  said, 


iVerity,  My  servants  (i.e.  the  true  believers  of  Islamic 
Monotheism)  -  you  have  no  authority  over  them.  And 
sufficient  is  your  Lord  as  a  Guardian .}  (17:65). 

We  should  state  here  that  the  believers,  whom  the  human 


56 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlm 

enemies  kill,  become  martyrs,  while  those  who  fall  victim  to 
the  inner  enemy  -  Satan  -  become  bandits.  Further,  the 
believers  who  are  defeated  by  the  apparent  enemy  - 
disbelievers  -  gain  a  reward,  while  those  defeated  by  the  inner 
enemy  earn  a  sin  and  become  misguided.  Since  Satan  sees 
man  where  man  cannot  see  him,  it  is  befitting  that  the 
believers  seek  refuge  from  Satan  with  Whom  Satan  cannot  see. 
The  Isti'ddhah  is  a  form  of  drawing  closer  to  Allah  and  seeking 
refuge  with  Him  from  the  evil  of  every  evil  creature. 


What  does  Isti'ddhah  mean? 


Isti'ddhah  means,  “I  seek  refuge  with  Allah  from  the  cursed 
Satan  so  that  he  is  prevented  from  affecting  my  religious  or 
worldly  affairs,  or  hindering  me  from  adhering  to  what  I  was 
commanded,  or  luring  me  into  what  I  was  prohibited  from.” 
Indeed,  only  Allah  is  able  to  prevent  the  evil  of  Satan  from 
touching  the  son  of  Adam.  This  is  why  Allah  allowed  us  to  be 
lenient  and  kind  with  the  human  devil,  so  that  his  soft  nature 
might  cause  him  to  refrain  from  the  evil  he  is  indulging  in. 
However,  Allah  required  us  to  seek  refuge  with  Him  from  the 
evil  of  Satan,  because  he  neither  accepts  bribes  nor  does 
kindness  affect  him,  for  he  is  pure  evil.  Thus,  only  He  Who 
created  Satan  is  able  to  stop  his  evil.  This  meaning  is 
reiterated  in  only  three  Ayat  in  the  Qur’an.  Allah  said  in  Surat 
Al-A‘raf, 

^  if  ojift  &  jiwi' 


iShow  forgiveness,  enjoin  what  is  good,  and  him  away  from 
the  foolish  (i.e.  don't  punish  them).}  (7:199) 

This  is  about  dealing  with  human  beings.  He  then  said  in 
the  same  Surah, 


.  f  Ac  £2^*  'A\ 


4  And  if  an  evil  whisper  comes  to  you  from  Shay  tan,  then  seek 
refuge  with  Allah.  Verily,  He  is  Hearing,  Knowing  (7:  200).$ 


Allah  also  said  in  Surat  Al-Mu’minun, 


Cjyub  !>—*''  ij*  Jr  v  / 

T  ^  o'  si; 


57 


Surah  1.  Al-Fdtihah  (Portal} 


iRepel  evil  zoith  that  which  is  better.  We  are  Best-Acquainted 
with  the  things  they  utter.  And  say:  "My  Lord!  I  seek  refuge 
with  You  from  the  whisperings  (suggestions)  of  the  Shaydtm 
(devils).  And  I  seek  refuge  zoith  You,  My  Lord!  lest  they  should 
come  near  me . "  (23 :96-98) .  ) 


Further,  Allah  said  in  Surat  As-Sajdah, 

iyjl  aili.  ijM  ijU  <>1^5  ,j)L  kSH. i  ')j) 

fyj  rf,J-5a£.  _lli  J3  Cj  Sfjf*  cA\  ^  l '/)  n's^JL 

4.?'.  '£>  Si 

iTIte  good  deed  and  the  evil  deed  cannot  be  equal.  Repel  (the 
evil)  with  one  which  is  better,  theti  verily  he,  between  whom 
and  you  there  was  enmity,  (will  becotne)  as  though  he  was  a 
close  friend.  But  none  is  granted  it  (the  above  quality)  except 
those  who  are  patient  -  and  none  is  granted  it  except  the 
owner  of  the  great  portion  (of  happiness  in  the  Hereafter,  i.e. 
Paradise  and  of  a  high  moral  clwracter)  in  this  world.  And  if  an 
evil  whisper  from  Shaytdn  tries  to  turn  you  away  (from  doing 
good),  then  seek  refuge  in  Allah.  Verily,  He  is  the  Hearing,  the 
Knowing)  (41:34-36). 


Why  the  Devil  is  called  Shaytdn 

In  the  Arabic  language,  Shaytdn  is  derived  from  Shatana, 
which  means  the  far  thing.  Hence,  the  Shaytdn  has  a  different 
nature  than  mankind,  and  his  sinful  ways  are  far  away  from 
every  type  of  righteousness.  It  was  also  said  that  Shaytdn  is 
derived  from  Shata,  (literally  ‘burned’),  because  it  was  created 
from  fire.  Some  scholars  said  that  both  meanings  are  correct, 
although  they  state  that  the  first  meaning  is  more  plausible. 
Further,  Siybawayh  (the  renowned  Arab  linguistic)  said,  “The 
Arabs  say,  ‘So-and-so  has  Tashaytan,’  when  he  commits  the 
act  of  the  devils.  If  Shaytdn  was  derived  from  Shata,  they 
would  have  said,  Tashayyata  (rather  than  Tashaytan).”  Hence, 
Shaytdn  is  derived  from  the  word  that  means,  far  away.  This 
is  why  they  call  those  who  are  rebellious  (or  mischievous)  from 
among  the  Jinns  and  mankind  a  ‘Shaytdn’.  Allah  said, 


&  di  ^  uri  &  p,  az 


58 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathy: 

$Attd  so  We  have  appointed  for  every  Prophet  enemies  — 
Shayatin  (devils)  among  mankind  and  Jinn,  inspiring  one 
another  with  adorned  speech  as  a  delusion  (or  by  way  of 
deception)}  (6:112). 

In  addition,  the  Musnad  by  Imam  Ahmad  records  that  Abu 
Dharr  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 

i ji  4u\j  ji  ui 

«0  Abu  Dharr!  Seek  refuge  toith  Allah  from  the  devils  of 
mankind  and  the  JinnsJ 

Abu  Dharr  said,  “I  asked  him  jg,  ‘Are  there  human  devils?’  He 
said,  (lYes.n”11*  Furthermore,  it  is  recorded  in  Sahth  Muslim 
that  Abu  Dharr  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 

f 

«77ic  woman,  the  donkey  and  the  black  dog  interrupt  the  prayer 
(if  they  pass  in  front  of  those  who  do  not  pray  behind  a  Sutrah, 
i.e.  a  barrier )j 

Abu  Dharr  said,  “1  said,  What  is  the  difference  between  the 
black  dog  and  the  red  or  yellow  dog?’  He  said, 

ipVi  4isdi» 

«77/e  black  dog  is  a  devil .».”’2’ 

Also,  Ibn  Jarir  At-Tabari  recorded  that  ‘Umar  bin  Al-Khattab 
once  rode  a  Berthawn  (huge  camel)  which  started  to  proceed 
arrogantly.  “Umar  kept  striking  the  animal,  but  the  animal 
kept  walking  in  an  arrogant  manner.  Umar  dismounted  the 
animal  and  said,  “By  Allah!  You  have  carried  me  on  a 
Shaytan.  I  did  not  come  down  from  it  until  after  I  had  felt 
something  strange  in  my  heart.”  This  Hadith  has  an  authentic 
chain  of  narrators.’3’ 

The  Meaning  of  Ar-Rajtm 

Ar-Rajim  means,  being  expelled  from  all  types  of 
righteousness.  Allah  said, 

[1’  Ahmad  5:178. 

[2’  Muslim  1:365. 

[3J  At-Tabari  1:111. 


Surah  2.  Al-Fatihah  (Part-1) 


59 


4And  indeed  We  have  adorned  the  nearest  heaven  with  lamps, 
and  We  have  made  such  lamps  Rujuman  (as  missiles)  to  drive 
away  the  Shayatin  (devils)}'  (67:5). 

Allah  also  said, 


ji  3f  Gill  gS  %} 

viki-  ,>  V)  v'ic  \JJ4  'Xf  if  J*  Zijijjp  je-V) 


iVerily,  We  have  adorned  the  near  heaven  with  the  stars  (for 
beauty).  And  to  guard  against  every  rebellious  devil.  They 
cannot  listen  to  the  higher  group  (angels)  for  they  are  pelted 
from  every  side.  Outcast,  and  theirs  is  a  constant  (or  painful) 
torment.  Except  such  as  snatch  away  something  by  stealing, 
and  they  are  pursued  by  a  flaming  fire  of  piercing  brightness} 
(37:6-10).  " 


Further,  Allah  said. 


if  ot  Gijjj  'C.jfi  Jj  uIG.  XAj} 


^  ,  f  y  Cfrf  ^11  {y  VI 

iAnd  indeed,  We  have  put  the  big  stars  in  the  heaven  and  We 
beautified  it  for  the  beholders.  And  We  have  guarded  it  (near 
heaven)  from  every  Shaytan  Rajtm  (outcast  Shaijtdn).  Except 
him  (devil)  who  steals  the  hearing  then  he  is  pursued  by  a  clear 
flaming  fire.}  (15:16-18). 


There  are  several  similar  Ayat.  It  was  also  said  that  Rajim 
means,  the  person  who  throws  or  bombards  things,  because 
the  devil  throws  doubts  and  evil  thoughts  in  people’s  hearts. 
The  first  meaning  is  more  popular  and  accurate. 


Bismillah  is  the  First  Ayah  of  Al-Fatihah 

The  Companions  started  the  Book  of  Allah  with  Bismillah : 


$1.  In  the  Name  of  Allah,  the  Most  Gracious,  the  Most 
Merciful.} 

The  scholars  also  agree  that  Bismillah  is  a  part  of  an  Ayah 


60 


Tafsir  ton  Katlm 

in  Surat  An-Naml  (chapter  27).  They  disagree  over  whether  it  is 
a  separate  Ayah  before  every  Surah,  or  if  it  is  an  Ayah,  or  a 
part  of  an  Ayah ,  included  in  every  Surah  where  the  Bismillah 
appears  in  its  beginning.  Ad-Daraqutni  also  recorded  a  Hadith 
from  Abu  Hurayrah  from  the  Prophet  jgg  that  supports  this 
Hadith  by  Ibn  Khuzaymah.  Also,  similar  statements  were 
attributed  to  ‘Ali,  Ibn  ‘Abbas  and  others.11' 

The  opinion  that  Bismillah  is  an  Ayah  of  every  Surah,  except 
Al-Bara’ah  (chapter  9),  was  attributed  to  (the  Companions)  Ibn 
‘Abbas,  Ibn  “Umar,  Ibn  Az-Zubayr,  Abu  Hurayrah  and  ‘Ali. 
This  opinion  was  also  attributed  to  the  Tabi'in :  ‘Ata\  TawQs, 
Said  bin  Jubayr,  Makhul  and  Az-Zuhri.  This  is  also  the  view 
of  ‘Abdullah  bin  Al-Mubarak,  Ash-Shafil,  Ahmad  bin  Hanbal, 
(in  one  report  from  him)  Ishaq  bin  Rahwayh  and  Abu  ‘Ubayd 
Al-Qasim  bin  Salam.  On  the  other  hand,  Malik,  Abu  Hanifah 
and  their  followers  said  that  Bismillah  is  not  an  Ayah  in  Al- 
Fatihiah  or  any  other  Surah.  Dawud  said  that  it  is  a  separate 
Ayah  in  the  beginning  of  every  Surah,  not  part  of  the  Surah 
itself,  and  this  opinion  was  also  attributed  to  Ahmad  bin 
I4anbal. 

Basmalah  aloud  in  the  Prayer 

As  for  Basmalah  aloud  during  the  prayer,  those  who  did  not 
agree  that  it  is  a  part  of  Al-Fatihah,  state  that  the  Basmalah 
should  not  be  aloud.  The  scholars  who  stated  that  Bismillah  is 
a  part  of  every  Surah  (except  chapter  9)  had  different  opinions; 
some  of  them,  such  as  Ash-Shafil,  said  that  one  should  recite 
Bismillah  with  Al-Fatihah  aloud.  This  is  also  the  opinion  of 
many  among  the  Companions,  the  Tabi'in  and  the  Imams  of 
Muslims  from  the  Salaf  and  the  later  generations.  For 
instance,  this  is  the  opinion  of  Abu  Hurayrah,  Ibn  Umar,  Ibn 
‘Abbas,  Mu'awiyah,  Umar  and  ‘Ali  -  according  to  Ibn  ‘Abdul- 
Barr  and  Al-Bayhaqi.  Also,  the  Four  Khalifahs  -  as  Al-KhatJb 
reported  -  were  said  to  have  held  this  view  although  the  report 
from  them  is  contradicted.  The  Tabi'in  scholars  who  gave  this 
Tafsir  include  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Ikrimah,  Abu  Qilabah,  Az- 
Zuhri,  ‘Ali  bin  Al-Hasan,  his  son  Muhammad,  Said  bin  Al- 
Musayyib,  ‘Ata’,  TawQs,  Mujahid,  Salim,  Muhammad  bin  Ka“b 


Ad-Daraqutni  1 :303  and  306. 


Surah  1.  Al-Fatihah  (Portal) 


61 


Al-Qurazi,  Abu  Bakr  bin  Muhammad  bin  ‘Arar  bin  Hazm,  Abu 
Wa’il,  Ibn  Sirin,  Muhammad  bin  Al-Munkadir,  ‘Ali  bin 
‘Abdullah  bin  ‘Abbas,  his  son  Muhammad,  Nafi‘  the  freed  slave 
of  Ibn  ‘Umar,  Zayd  bin  Aslam,  Umar  bin  ‘Abdul-Aziz,  Al-Azraq 
bin  Qays,  Habib  bin  Abi  Thabit,  Abu  Ash-Shatha’,  MakhOl 
and  ‘Abdullah  bin  Ma'qil  bin  Muqarrin.  Also,  Al-Bayhaqi  added 
‘Abdullah  bin  Safwan,  and  Muhammad  bin  Al-Hanafiyyah  to 
this  list.  In  addition,  Ibn  ‘Abdul-Barr  added  ‘Amr  bin  Dinar. 

The  proof  that  these  scholars  relied  on  is  that,  since 
Bismillah  is  a  part  of  Al-Fatihah,  it  should  be  recited  aloud  like 
the  rest  of  Al-Fatihah.  Also,  An-Nasa’i  recorded  in  his  Sunan, 
Ibn  Hibban  and  Ibn  Khuzaymah  in  their  Sahihs  and  Al-Hakim 
in  the  Mustadrak,  that  Abu  Hurayrah  once  performed  the 
prayer  and  recited  Bismillah  aloud.  After  he  finished  the 
prayer,  he  said,  “Among  you,  I  perform  the  prayer  that  is  the 
closest  to  the  prayer  of  the  Messenger  of  Allah  s§.”  Ad- 
Daraqutni,  Al-Khatlb  and  Al-Bayhaqi  graded  this  Hadlth 
Sahihf ^  Furthermore,  in  Sahih  Al-Bukhari  it  is  recorded  that 
Anas  bin  Malik  was  asked  about  the  recitation  of  the  Prophet 
M-  He  said,  “His  recitation  was  unhurried.”  He  then 
demonstrated  that  and  recited,  while  lengthening  the  recitation 
of  Bismillah  Ar-Rahman  Ar-Rahim}2^  Also,  in  the  Musnad  of 
Imam  Ahmad,  the  Sunan  of  Abu  Dawud,  the  Sahih  of  Ibn 
Hibban  and  the  Mustadrak  of  Al-Hakim  -  it  is  recorded  that 
Umm  Salamah  said,  “The  Messenger  of  Allah  used  to 
distinguish  each  Ayah  during  his  recitation, 


S.tt  "  ....  * 


iln  the  Name  of  Allah,  the  Most  Gracious,  the  Most  Merciful. 

All  praise  and  thanks  be  to  Allah,  the  Lord  of  all  that  exists, 
the  Most  Gracious,  the  Most  Merciful.  The  Owner  of  the  Day 
of  Recompense  .y' 

Ad-Daraqutni  graded  the  chain  of  narration  for  this  Hadith 


An-Nasal  2:134,  Ibn  Khuzaymah  1:251,  Ibn  Hibban  3:143,  Al- 
Hakim  1:232,  Ad-Daraqutni  1:305,  Al-Khatlb  and  Al-Bayhaqi 
2:46. 

121  FathAl-Bdri  8:709. 


62 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

Sahib} *’  Furthermore,  Imam  Abu  ‘Abdullah  Ash-Shafil  and  Al¬ 
ii  akim  in  his  Mustadrak,  recorded  that  Mu'awiyah  led  the 
prayer  in  Al-Madlnah  and  did  not  recite  the  Bismillah.  The 
Muhajirin  who  were  present  at  that  prayer  criticized  that. 
When  Mu'awiyah  led  the  following  prayer,  he  recited  the 
Bismillah  aloud.’2’ 

The  Hadiths  mentioned  above  provide  sufficient  proof  for  the 
opinion  that  the  Bismillah  is  recited  aloud.  As  for  the  opposing 
evidences  and  the  scientific  analysis  of  the  narrations 
mentioned  their  weaknesses  or  otherwise  it  is  not  our  desire 
to  discuss  this  subject  at  this  time. 

Other  scholars  stated  that  the  Bismillah  should  not  be 
recited  aloud  in  the  prayer,  and  this  is  the  established  practice 
of  the  Four  Khalifahs,  as  well  as  ‘Abdullah  bin  Mughaffal  and 
several  scholars  among  the  TabVin  and  later  generations.  It  is 
also  the  Madhhab  (view)  of  Abu  Hanlfah,  Ath-Thawri  and 
Ahmad  bin  Hanbal. 

Imam  Malik  stated  that  the  Bismillah  is  not  recited  aloud  or 
silently.  This  group  based  their  view  upon  what  Imam  Muslim 
recorded  that  ‘A’ishah  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  used 
to  start  the  prayer  by  reciting  the  Takbir  (Allahu  Akbar ;  Allah 
is  Greater)  and  then  recite, 

i— >j  4JS 

iAll  praise  and  thanks  be  to  Allah,  the  Lord  of  all  that  exists 

(Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:12). 

Also,  the  Two  Sahihs  recorded  that  Anas  bin  Malik  said,  “I 
prayed  behind  the  Prophet  jg,  Abu  Bakr,  ‘Umar  and  Uthman 
sind  they  used  to  stsirt  their  prayer  with, 

iAll  praise  and  thanks  be  to  Allah,  the  Lord  of  all  that  exists. $ 

Muslim  added,  “And  they  did  not  mention, 

p  * — # 

ilti  the  Name  of  Allah,  the  Most  Gracious ,  the  Most  Merciful > 

l1!  Ahmad  6:302,  Abu  Dawud  4:294,  Ibn  Khuzaymah  1:248,  AI- 

Hkkim  2 :231 ,  Ad-Daraqutni  1 :307 . 

^  Musrtad  Al-Imam  Ash-Shafil  1 :80 ,  Al-Hakim  1 :233 . 


63 


Surah  1.  Al-Fatihah  (Parti} 

whether  in  the  beginning  or  the  end  of  the  recitation.”1 11 
Similar  is  recorded  in  the  Sunan  books  from  ‘Abdullah  bin 
Mughaffal,  may  Allah  be  pleased  with  him.12* 

These  are  the  opinions  held  by  the  respected  Imams,  and 
their  statements  are  similar  in  that  they  agree  that  the  prayer 
of  those  who  recite  Al-Fatihah  aloud  or  in  secret  is  correct.  All 
the  favor  is  from  Allah. 


The  Virtue  of  Al-Fatihah 


Imam  Ahmad  recorded  in  his  Musnad,  that  a  person  who 
was  riding  behind  the  Prophet  ag  said,  “The  Prophet’s  animal 
tripped,  so  I  said,  ‘Cursed  Shaytan.’  The  Prophet  jg  said, 


:Jlij  jiiU:  ijUallll  :dii  lil  Jl;U  4jUallj|  :  jz  V* 

34  >-  ;iu;  ^»i 


“Do  not  say,  'Cursed  Shaytan,’  for  if  you  say  these  words, 
Satan  becomes  arrogant  and  says,  'With  my  strength  I  made 
him  fall,'  When  you  say,  'Bismilidh,'  Satan  will  become  as 
small  as  a  fly 


Further,  An-Nasa’i  recorded  in  his  book  Al-Yawm  wal-Laylah, 
and  also  Ibn  Marduwyah  in  his  Tafsir  that  Usamah  bin 
‘Umayr  said,  “I  was  riding  behind  the  Prophet...”  and  he 
mentioned  the  rest  of  the  above  Hadith.  The  Prophet  jg  said  in 
this  narration, 


"“i  ‘J*1'  (*~J  -J*  j_j^i  li  Ijio  'i  • 

.  ®  Aj  C  JJ  IS 


“Do  not  say  these  words,  because  then  Satan  becomes  larger;  as 

Fath  Al-Bari  2:265,  and  Muslim  1 :299.  We  should  state  that  Al- 
Hafiz  Ibn  Hajar  Al-Asqalani  said  in  his  book  Bulugh  Al-Maram, 
‘Ahmad ,  An-Nasa’i  and  Ibn  Khuzaymah  recorded  this  wording  (for 
the  Hadith  above) :  They  did  not  recite  4l—^0  _ _ _ !)$► 

4 in  the  Name  of  Allah,  the  Most  Gracious,  the  Most  Merciful} 
aloud.’  In  another  narration  by  Ibn  Khuzaymah,  They  used  to 
recite  it  silently.’  This  is  the  meaning  intended  (by  the  Hadith 
recorded  by  Muslim).” 

*2'  At-Tirmidhi  no .  244 . 

131  Ahmad  5:59. 


64 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

large  as  a  house.  Rather,  say,  'Bismilldh,'  because  Satan  then 
becomes  as  small  as  a  fly.  »|11 

This  is  the  blessing  of  reciting  Bismilldh. 


Basmalah  is  recommended  before  performing  any  Deed 

Basmalah  (reciting  Bismilldh)  is  recommended  before  starting 
any  action  or  deed.  For  instance,  Basmalah  is  recommended 
before  starting  a  Khutbah  (speech). 

The  Basmalah  is  also  recommended  before  one  enters  the 
place  where  he  wants  to  relieve  himself,  there  is  a  Hadlth 
concerning  this  practice.^2*  Further,  Basmalah  is 
recommended  at  the  beginning  of  ablution,  for  Imam  Ahmad 
and  the  Sunan  compilers  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah,  Said 
bin  Zayd  and  Abu  Said  narrated  from  the  Prophet  3^5, 

Jill  V® 

«' There  is  no  valid  ablution  for  he  who  did  not  mention  Allah’s 
Name  in 


This  Hadith  is  Hasan  (good).  Also,  the  Basmalah  is 
recommended  before  eating,  for  Muslim  recorded  in  his  Sahih 
that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  5g  said  to  Umar  bin  Abi  Salamah 
while  he  was  a  child  under  his  care, 


(.ILL  L/  fSj  4)1  JJ) 


*Say  Bismilldh,  eat  with  your  right  hand  and  eat  from 
whatever  is  next  to  you.#*4’ 


Some  of  the  scholars  stated  that  Basmalah  before  eating  is 
obligatory.  Basmalah  before  having  sexual  intercourse  is  also 
recommended.  The  Two  Sahihs  recorded  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said 
that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  said, 


vJi}  oikiji  jUui  41  ^  :  jii  iui  M  sr;f  \l\ 

flljbl  jjlU-.-ll  0 jJxj  pJ  jJ j  1  ^ 4V  jJUj  u}  t  jj  U  J UaljJ I 


^  An-Nas&l  in  A l-Kubra  6 : 142. 

^  4 Awn  Al-Ma*bud  (the  explanation  of  Sunan  Abu  Dawud)  1 :6 

I3*  Ahmad  3:41,  Abu  Dawud  1:75,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  1:115,  An- 
Nasal  1 :61 ,  and  Ibn  Majah  1 :140 

^  Muslim  3  : 1600. 


Surah  1.  Al-Fdtihah  (Part-1) 


65 


*If  anyone  of  you  before  having  sexual  relations  with  his  wife 
says,  'In  the  Name  of  Allah.  O  Allah!  Protect  us  from  Satan 
and  also  protect  what  you  grant  us  (meaning  the  coming 
offspring)  from  Satan,’  and  if  it  is  destined  that  they  should 
have  a  child  then,  Satan  will  never  be  able  to  harm  that 
child .»**< 


The  Meaning  of  “Allah” 


Allah  is  the  Name  of  the. Lord,  the  Exalted.  It  is  said  that 
Allah  is  the  Greatest  Name  of  Allah,  because  it  is  referred  to 
when  describing  Allah  by  the  various  attributes.  For  instance, 
Allah  said. 


iif  ji  ^31  ^  %  y  4$  &  & 

vipf  y  \  'V 

2  Uj6\  J&it  ft  y  di  3 

**  #  >5%  a  O'  ^  ^ 


4 He  is  Allah,  beside  Whom  La  ilalta  ilia  Huwa  (none  has  the 
right  to  be  worshipped  but  He)  the  Knmoer  of  the  unseen  and 
the  seen.  He  is  the  Most  Gracious,  the  Most  Merciful.  He  is 
Allah,  beside  Whom  Ld  ilalta  ilia  Huwa,  the  King,  the  Holy, 
the  One  free  from  all  dejects,  the  Giver  of  security,  the  Watcher 
over  His  creatures,  the  Almighty,  the  Compeller,  the  Supreme. 
Glory  be  to  Allah!  (High  is  He)  above  all  that  they  associate  as 
partners  with  Him.  He  is  Allah,  the  Creator,  the  Inventor  of  all 
things,  the  Bestower  of  fbnns.  To  Him  belong  the  Best  Names. 

All  that  is  in  the  heavens  and  the  earth  glorify  Him.  And  He  is 
the  Almighty,  the  Wise}  (59:22-24). 

Hence,  Allah  mentioned  several  of  His  Names  as  Attributes 
for  His  Name  Allah.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


4And  (all)  the  Most  Beautiful  Names  belong  to  Allah,  so  call 
on  Him  by  them}  (7:180),  and. 


52 iVf  %  u  i) 


111  Fath  Al-Bari 9: 136,  Muslim  2:1058. 


66 


Tafsir  Rm  Kathir 


4 Say  (O  Muhammad  jg:)  "Invoke  Allah  or  invoke  the  Most 
Gracious  (Allah),  by  whatever  name  you  invoke  Him  (it  is  the 
same),  for  to  Him  belong  the  Best  Names."}  (17:110) 


Also,  the  Two  Sahths  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that 
the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


<&Ji  jis  uuJ-f  if  <  ijb.13  7;  t  tiii  Ll:  4)  !>j» 


11  Allah  has  ninety-nine  Natnes,  one  hundred  tninus  one, 
whoever  counts  (and  preserves)  them,  will  enter  Paradise. n1'1 

These  Names  were  mentioned  in  a  Hadith  recorded  by  At- 
Tirmidhi*21  and  Ibn  Majah,  and  there  are  several  differences 
between  these  two  narrations. 


The  Meaning  of  Ar-Rahman  Ar-Rahim  -  the  Most 
Gracious,  the  Most  Merciful 


Ar-Rahman  and  Ar-Rahim  are  two  names  derived  from  Ar- 
Rahmah  (the  mercy),  but  Rahman  has  more  meanings  that 
pertain  to  mercy  than  Ar-Rahim.  There  is  a  statement  by  Ibn 
Jarir  that  indicates  that  there  is  a  consensus  on  this  meaning. 
Further,  Al-Qurtubi  said,  “The  proof  that  these  names  are 
derived  (from  Ar-Rahmah ),  is  what  At-Tirmidhi  recorded  -  and 
graded  Sahih  from  ‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  ‘Awf  that  he  heard  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  say, 

\^>j  Ifl  tLii  ijl  ciiij  '^)\  iiU  ul  :  Jui  ju» 


a Allah  the  Exalted  said,  7  Am  Ar-Rahmdn.  I  created  the 
Raltam  (womb,  i.e.  family  relations)  and  derived  a  name  for  it 
from  My  Name.  Hetice,  ivhoever  keeps  it,  I  will  keep  ties  to 
him,  and  whoever  severs  it,  I  zvill  sever  ties  with  him . 'i'3' 

He  then  said,  “This  is  a  text  that  indicates  the  derivation.”  He 
then  said,  “The  Arabs  denied  the  name  Ar-Rahman,  because  of 
their  ignorance  about  Allah  and  His  attributes.” 

Al-Qurtubi  said,  “It  was  said  that  both  Ar-Rahman  and  Ar- 
Rahim  have  the  same  meaning,  such  as  the  words  Nadman 


m  Fath  Al-Bari  11:218,  Muslim  4 :2062 . 

^  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  9 :480 ,  and  Ibn  Majah  2 : 1269 . 
^  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  6 :33 


Surah  1 .  At-Fdtihah  (Part-1 


67 


and  Nadim,  as  Abu  TJbayd  has  stated.  Abu  ‘Ali  Al-Farisi  said, 
‘Ar-Rahman,  which  is  exclusively  for  Allah,  is  a  name  that 
encompasses  every  type  of  mercy  that  Allah  has.  Ar-Rahlm  is 
what  effects  the  believers,  for  Allah  said, 

4P?p  c&P{  o^=>j} 

iAnd  He  is  ever  Rahim  (merciful)  to  the  believers.}’  (33:43) 

Also,  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  -  about  Ar-Rahman  and  Ar- Rahim,  They 
are  two  soft  names,  one  of  them  is  softer  than  the  other 
(meaning  it  carries  more  implications  of  mercy).’ 

Ibn  Jarir  said;  As-Surri  bin  Yahya  At-Tamlmi  narrated  to  me 
that  ‘Uthman  bin  Zufar  related  that  Al-‘Azrami  said  about  Ar- 
Rahman  and  Ar-Rahlm,  “He  is  Ar-Rahman  with  all  creation 
and  Ar-Raljim  with  the  believers. ”^21  Hence.  Allah’s 
statements, 

iThen  He  rose  over  (Istawd)  the  Throne  (in  a  manner  that 
suits  His  majesty),  Ar-Rahman >  (25:59), ^  and, 

£%&&&* 

iAr-Rahmdn  (Allah)  rose  over  (Istawd)  the  (Mighty)  Throne  (in 
a  manner  that  suits  His  majesty).}  (20:5) 

Allah  thus  mentioned  the  Istawa  -  rising  over  the  Throne  - 
along  with  His  Name  Ar-Rahman,  to  indicate  that  His  mercy 
encompasses  all  of  His  creation.  Allah  also  said, 

4\L^ 


4And  He  is  ever  Rahim  (merciful)  to  the  believers},  thus 
encompassing  the  believers  with  His  Name  Ar-Rahlm.  They  said, 
“This  testifies  to  the  fact  that  Ar-Rahman  carries  a  broader  scope 
of  meanings  pertaining  to  the  mercy  of  Allah  with  His  creation  in 
both  lives.  Meanwhile,  Ar-Rahlm  is  exclusively  for  the  believers.” 
Yet,  we  should  mention  that  there  is  a  supplication  that  reads, 


<  L> j. «■;>•_)  J  ^  J  CjJl 


*The  Rahman  and  the  Rahim  of  this  life  and  the  Hereafter » 


11  Tafsir  Al-Qurtubi  1 : 105. 
121  At-Tabari  1 :127. 


68 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Allah’s  Name  Ar-Rahman  is  exclusively  His.  For  instance, 
Allah  said, 


t  i\  gsstf  t#  j  s  £;r  & 


iSay  (O  Muhammad  3$) :  " Invoke  Allah  or  invoke  Ar-Rahman 
(Allah),  by  whatever  name  you  invoke  Him  (it  is  the  same),  for 
to  Him  belong  the  Best  Names >  (17:110), >  and, 


(&  <£&  *S>  os  CP  tiij  *  JBJ* 


iAnd  ask  (O  Muhammad  jg)  those  o/  0«r  Messengers  whom 
We  sent  before  you :  " Did  We  ever  appoint  alihah  (gods)  to  be 
worshipped  besides  Ar-Rahman  (Most  Gracious,  Alldh )?"} 
(43:45). 


Further,  when  Musaylimah  the  Liar  called  himself  the 
Rahman  of  Yam  am  ah,  Allah  made  him  known  by  the  name 
‘Liar’  and  exposed  him.  Hence,  whenever  Musaylimah  is 
mentioned,  he  is  described  as  ‘the  Liar’.  He  became  an 
example  for  lying  among  the  residents  of  the  cities  and  villages 
and  the  residents  of  the  deserts,  the  bedouins. 

Therefore,  Allah  first  mentioned  His  Name  -  Allah  -  that  is 
exclusively  His  and  described  this  Name  by  Ar-Rahman,  which 
no  one  else  is  allowed  to  use,  just  as  Allah  said, 


%  i£s  U  i\  iJ-’J  J\  at  J#f 


iSay  (O  Muhammad  ig) :  "Invoke  Alldh  or  invoke  Ar-Rahman 
(Alldh),  by  whatever  name  you  invoke  Him  (it  is  the  same),  for 
to  Him  belong  the  Best  Names."}  (17:110) 

Only  Musaylimah  and  those  who  followed  his  misguided 
ways  described  Musaylimah  by  Ar-Rahman. 

As  for  Allah’s  Name  Ar- Rahim,  Allah  has  described  others  by 
it.  For  instance,  Allah  said, 


4?  Ax 

— 


iVerily,  there  has  come  unto  you  a  Messenger  (Muhammad  jg) 
from  amongst  yourselves  (i.e.  whom  you  know  well).  It  grieves 
him  that  you  should  receive  any  injury  or  difficulty.  He 
(Muhammad  3g)  is  anxious  over  you  (to  be  rightly  guided)  for 
the  believers  (he  sg  is)  kind  (full  of  pity),  and  Rahim 


69 


Surah  1.  Al-Fdtihah  (Parti} 


(merciful))  (9:128). 

Allah  has  also  described  some  of  His  creation  using  some  of 
His  other  Names.  For  instance,  Allah  said, 


J0 


iVerily,  We  have  created  man  from  Nutfah  (drops)  of  mixed 
semen  (sexual  discharge  of  man  and  woman),  in  order  to  try 
him,  so  We  made  him  hearer  (Sam?)  and  seer  (Basir)  (76:2). 


In  conclusion,  there  are  several  of  Allah’s  Names  that  are 
used  as  names  for  others  besides  Allah.  Further,  some  of 
Allah’s  Names  are  exclusive  for  Allah  alone,  such  as  Allah,  Ar- 
Rahman,  Al-Khaliq  (the  Creator),  Ar-R&ziq  (the  Sustainer),  and 
so  forth. 

Hence,  Allah  started  the  Tasmiyah  (meaning,  In  the  Name  of 
Allah,  Most  Gracious  Most  Merciful1)  with  His  Name,  Allah, 
and  described  Himself  as  Ar- Rahman,  (Most  Gracious)  which 
is  softer  and  more  general  than  Ar-Rahlm.  The  most  honorable 
Names  are  mentioned  first,  just  as  Allah  did  here. 

A  Hadith  narrated  by  Umm  Salamah  stated  that  the 
recitation  of  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  was  slow  and  clear, 
letter  by  letter, 


■  yill 


iln  the  Name  of  Allah,  the  Most  Gracious,  the  Most  Merciful. 

All  the  praises  and  thanks  be  to  Allah,  the  Lord  of  all  that 
exists.  The  Most  Gracious,  the  Most  Merciful.  The  Owner  of 
the  Day  of  Recompense)  (1:1-4). 

And  this  is  how  a  group  of  scholars  recite  it.  Others 
connected  the  recitation  of  the  Tasmiyah  to  Al-Hamd. 

<_>j  4jj  ju^M) 


42.  Al-Hamd  be  to  Allah,  the  Lord  of  all  that  exists.) 


The  Meaning  of  Al-Hamd 

Abu  Ja*far  bin  Jarir  said,  “The  meaning  of 


70 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

iAl-Hamdu  Lillah }  (all  praise  and  thanks  be  to  Allah)  is:  all 
thanks  are  due  purely  to  Allah,  alone,  not  any  of  the  objects 
that  are  being  worshipped  instead  of  Him,  nor  any  of  His 
creation.  These  thanks  are  due  to  Allah’s  innumerable  favors 
and  bounties,  that  only  He  knows  the  amount  of.  Allah’s 
bounties  include  creating  the  tools  that  help  the  creation 
worship  Him,  the  physical  bodies  with  which  they  are  able  to 
implement  His  commands,  the  sustenance  that  He  provides 
them  in  this  life,  and  the  comfortable  life  He  has  granted  them, 
without  anything  or  anyone  compelling  Him  to  do  so.  Allah  also 
warned  His  creation  and  alerted  them  about  the  means  and 
methods  with  which  they  can  earn  eternal  dwelling  in  the 
residence  of  everlasting  happiness.  All  thanks  and  praise  are 
due  to  Allah  for  these  favors  from  beginning  to  end.”* 11 
Further,  Ibn  Jarir  commented  on  the  Ayah, 

x^»&} 

iAl-Hamdu  Lillah},  that  it  means,  “A  praise  that  Allah  praised 
Himself  with,  indicating  to  His  servants  that  they  too  should 
praise  Him,  as  if  Allah  had  said,  ‘Say:  All  thanks  and  praise  is 
due  to  Allah.’  It  was  said  that  the  statement, 

4AII  praise  and  thanks  be  to  Allah},  entails  praising  Allah  by 
mentioning  His  most  beautiful  Names  and  most  honorable 
Attributes.  When  one  proclaims,  ‘All  thanks  are  due  to  Allah,’ 
he  will  be  thanking  Him  for  His  favors  and  bounties. ”,2) 

The  Difference  between  Praise  and  Thanks 

Ijamd  is  more  general,  in  that  it  is  a  statement  of  praise  for 
one’s  characteristics,  or  for  what  he  has  done.  Thanks  are 
given  for  what  was  done,  not  merely  for  characteristics. 

The  Statements  of  the  Salaf  about  Al-Hamd 

+ 

Hafs  mentioned  that  ‘Umar  said  to  ‘Ali,  “We  know  La.  ilaha 
illallah,  Subhan  Allah  and  Allahu  Akbar.  What  about  Al- 
Hamdu  Lillah?”  ‘Ali  said,  “A  statement  that  Allah  liked  for 


111  At-Jabari  1:135. 
121  At-Jabari  1 :137. 


Surah  1 .  Al-Fdtihah  (Part-1) 


71 


Himself,  was  pleased  with  for  Himself  and  He  likes  that  it  be 
repeated.”11^  Also,  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Al-Hamdu  Lillah  is  the 
statement  of  appreciation.  When  the  servant  says  Al-Hamdu 
Lillah,  Allah  says,  ‘My  servant  has  praised  Me.”  Ibn  Abi  Hatim 
recorded  this  Hadith.[2i 


The  Virtues  of  Al-Hamd 

Imam  Ahmad  bin  Hanbal  recorded  that  Al-Aswad  bin  Sari' 
said,  “I  said,  ‘O  Messenger  of  Allah!  Should  I  recite  to  you 
words  of  praise  for  My  Lord,  the  Exalted,  that  I  have 
collected?’  He  said, 

v— lit® 


« Verily ,  your  Lord  likes  Al-Hamd.*” 

An-Nasal  also  recorded  this  HadithP 1  Furthermore,  Abu  Isa 
At-Tirmidhi,  An-Nasa’i  and  Ibn  Majah  recorded  that  Musa  bin 
Ibrahim  bin  Kathlr  related  that  Talhah  bin  Khirash  said  that 
Jabir  bin  ‘Abdullah  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  said, 


a  iuJi  pit;  mi  m  /x\  fciU 


«77ie  best  Dhikr  (remembering  Allah)  is  La  ilaha  illallah  and  the 
best  supplication  is  Al-Hamdu  Lillah .» 

At-Tirmidhi  said  that  this  Hadith  is  Hasan  Gharib.  ,4)  Also, 
Ibn  Majah  recorded  that  Anas  bin  Malik  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  said. 


lL>  J-iil  j 15^  Ml  <.4)1  -l<»>Jl  :Jl \j&  •u-njxi-  l_fip  4)1  U 


(i No  servant  is  blessed  by  Allah  and  says,' Al-Hamdu  Lillah', 
except  that  what  he  was  given  is  better  than  that  which  he  has 
himself  acquired .  »,s| 

Further,  in  his  Sunan,  Ibn  Majah  recorded  that  Ibn  TJmar 


[11  At-Tabari.  1 :15. 

121  Ibid.  1 :13. 

131  Ahmad  3 :435 ,  and  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  4 :416 . 

Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  9 :324 ,  An-Nasa’i  in  Al-Kubra  6 :208 ,  Ibn  Majah 
2:1249. 

151  Ibn  Majah  2:1250 


72 


1  Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  sg  said, 

fJiZj  Jj jZ,  US  iuil  Sa  IS  :  JIS  4)1  ^  j*  Su 

123  >e  :  ^  Al  J\  vl^  Ujjb  pi  villii  .  iljlUi 

:  nXf-  JU  ll»  vl^£  vlil^  ^jJu  V  JJUi  Jlj  J*  IjLp  j] 

ij^ri  v_j j  U  -Lw>Jl  vlU  :  J lJ  4)  2-»j  Ij  ;  VlS  <Jli  ISU 

^;uL:  ,6X±  JU  US  Udsi  :U*J  *4)1  jui  .il>L  il^3 

« .  ife  ji^C 


«A  servant  of  Allah  once  said,  ‘O  Allah!  Yours  is  the  Hamd 
that  is  suitable  for  the  grace  of  Your  Face  and  the  greatness  of 
Your  Supreme  Authority.'  The  two  angels  were  confused  as  to 
how  to  write  these  words.  They  ascended  to  Allah  and  said,  ‘O 
our  Lord!  A  servant  has  just  uttered  a  statement  and  we  are 
unsure  how  to  record  it  for  him.’  Allah  said  while  having  more 
knowledge  in  what  His  servant  has  said,  'What  did  My  servant 
say?’  They  said,  'He  said,  'O  Allah!  Yours  is  the  Hamd  that  is 
suitable  for  the  grace  of  Your  Face  and  the  greatness  of  Your 
Supreme  Authority.'  Allah  said  to  them.  Write  it  as  My 
servant  has  said  it,  until  he  meets  Me  and  tlwn  I  shall  reward 
him  for  if.#111 


Al  before  Hamd  encompasses  all  Types  of  Thanks  and 
Appreciation  for  Allah 


The  letters  Alif  and  Lam  before  the  word  Hamd  serve  to 
encompass  all  types  of  thanks  and  appreciation  for  Allah,  the 
Exalted.  A  Hadith  stated. 


Jjdp  3^ji  hsLf  JjlUji  iu'3  judJi  io 


ails’ 


«0  Allah!  All  of  Al-Hamd  is  due  to  You,  You  own  all  the 
ownership,  all  types  of  good  are  in  Your  Hand  and  all  affairs 
belong  to  Yom.»,2> 


111  Ibn  MSjah  2:1249. 

,2*  At-Targhtb  wat-Tarhib  2 :253 . 


73 


Surah  1.  Al-Fdtihah  (Part-1) 


The  Meaning  of  Ar-Rabb,  the  Lord 

Ar-Rabb  is  the  owner  who  has  full  authority  over  his 
property.  Ar-Rabb,  linguistically  means,  the  master  or  the  one 
who  has  the  authority  to  lead.  All  of  these  meanings  are 
correct  for  Allah.  When  it  is  alone,  the  word  Rabb  is  used  only 
for  Allah.  As  for  other  than  Allah,  it  can  be  used  to  say  Rabb 
Ad-Dar,  the  master  of  such  and  such  object.  Further,  it  was 
reported  that  Ar-Rabb  is  Allah’s  Greatest  Name. 


The  Meaning  of  Al-'Alamin 

Al-‘Alamin  is  plural  for  ‘Alam,  which  encompasses  everything 
in  existence  except  Allah.  The  word  ‘Alam  is  itself  a  plural 
word,  having  no  singular  form.  The  ‘Alamin  are  different 
creations  that  exist  in  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  on  land  and 
at  sea.  Every  generation  of  creation  is  called  an  ‘Alam.  Al- 
Farra*  and  Abu  TJbayd  said,  “‘Alam  includes  all  that  has  a 
mind,  the  Jinns,  mankind,  the  angels  and  the  devils,  but  not 
the  animals.”  Also,  Zayd  bin  Aslam  and  Abu  Muhaysin  said, 
‘Alam  includes  all  that  Allah  has  created  with  a  soul.”  Further, 
Qatadah  said  about, 


iTIte  Lord  of  the  'Alamin},  “Every  type  of  creation  is  an  “Alam.” 
Az-Zajjaj  also  said,  “Alam  encompasses  everything  that  Allah 
created,  in  this  life  and  in  the  Hereafter.”  Al-Qurtubi 
commented,  “This  is  the  correct  meaning,  that  the  ‘Alam 
encompasses  eveiything  that  Allah  created  in  both  worlds. 
Similarly,  Allah  said. 


iFir'awn  (Pharaoh)  said:  "And  what  is  the  Lord  of  the 
'Alamin?"  Musa  (Moses)  said:  “ The  Lord  of  the  heavetis  and 
the  earth,  and  all  that  is  betiveen  them,  if  you  seek  to  be 
convinced  with  certainty "}  (26:23-24). 


Why  is  the  Creation  called  ‘Alam? 

‘Alam  is  derived  from  ‘Alamah,  that  is  because  it  is  a  sign 
testifying  to  the  existence  of  its  Creator  and  to  His 
Oneness.”*1* 


111  Al-Qurtubi  1 :139. 


74 


Tgfsir  Ibn  Kathir 


,  ,  .  S'  .  *  s  *  s  i 


<3.  Ar-Rahmdn  (the  Most  Gracious),  Ar-Rahim  (the  Most 
Merciful)}.  Allah  said  next, 


iAr-Rahmdtt  (the  Most  Gracious),  Ar-Raltim  (the  Most  Merciful )} 
We  explained  these  Names  in  the  Basmalah.  Al-Qurtubi  said, 
“Allah  has  described  Himself  by  ‘Ar-Rahman,  Ar-Rahim’  after 
saying  “the  Lord  of  the  Alamin’,  so  His  statement  here  includes 
a  warning,  and  then  an  encouragement.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


jV>  S'sX  'A  ops 


iDeclare  (O  Muhammad  s&)  unto  My  servants,  that  truly,  I 
am  the  Oft-Forgiving,  the  Most  Merciful.  And  that  My 
torment  is  indeed  the  most  painful  torment .}  (15:49-50)(1* 
Allah  said, 


iSurely,  your  Lord  is  swift  in  retribution,  and  certainly  He  is 
Oft-Forgiving,  Most  Merciful .}  (6:165) 


Hence,  Rabb  contains  a  warning  while  Ar-Rahman  Ar-Rahim 
encourages.  Further,  Muslim  recorded  in  his  Sahih  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 

U  ISCJl  (JUi  pj  O-  ^  li  L  ^jA  41)1  Xp  U  JfpJ l  |JLo  p* 

tjJ-\  41^-3 


*lf  the  believer  knew  what  punishment  Allah  has,  none  would 
have  hope  in  acquiring  His  Paradise,  and  if  the  disbeliever  knew 
what  mercy  Allah  has,  none  will  lose  hope  of  earning  His 
earning .»’2’ 

44.  The  Owner  of  the  Day  of  Recompense .} 

Indicating  Sovereignty  on  the  Day  of  Judgment 

Allah  mentioned  His  sovereignty  of  the  Day  of  Resurrection, 


111  Ibid. 

Muslim  4 :2 109. 


75 


Surah  1.  Al-Fdtihah  (Part-1) 


but  this  does  not  negate  His  sovereignty  over  all  other  things. 
For  Allah  mentioned  that  He  is  the  Lord  of  existence,  including 
this  earthly  life  and  the  Hereafter.  Allah  only  mentioned  the 
Day  of  Recompense  here  because  on  that  Day,  no  one  except 
Him  will  be  able  to  claim  ownership  of  anything  whatsoever. 
On  that  Day,  no  one  will  be  allowed  to  speak  without  His 
permission.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


c#'  2  4  *  ^  J  $  \A  0 


iThe  Day  that  Ar-Riih  (fibril  (Gabriel)  or  another  angel)  and 
the  angels  will  stand  forth  in  rows,  they  will  not  speak  except 
him  whom  the  Most  Gracious  (Allah)  allows,  and  he  will  speak 
what  is  right.}  (78:38), 


^  £3  »  it 


iAttd  all  voices  will  be  humbled  for  the  Most  Gracious  (Allah), 
and  nothing  shall  you  hear  but  the  loiv  voice  of  their 
footsteps. >(20: 108),  and, 


Cjr"  ‘ft*\ S.  J-*  0 


iOn  the  Day  when  it  comes,  no  person  shall  speak  except  by 
His  (Allah's)  leave.  Some  among  them  will  be  wretched  and 
(others)  blessed}  (11:105). 

Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented,  “Allah  says, 
‘On  that  Day,  no  one  owns  anything  that  they  used  to  own  in 
the  world.’” 


The  Meaning  of  Yawm  Ad-Din 

Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Yawm  Ad-Din  is  the  Day  of  Recompense  for 
the  creatures,  meaning  the  Day  of  Judgment.  On  that  Day,  Allah 
will  reckon  the  creation  for  their  deeds,  evil  for  evil,  good  for 
good,  except  for  those  whom  He  pardons.”*11  In  addition,  several 
other  Companions,  Tabi'in  and  scholars  of  the  Salaf,  said 
similarly,  for  this  meaning  is  apparent  and  clear  from  the  Ayah. 

Allah  is  Al-Malik  (King  or  Owner) 

Allah  is  the  True  Owner  (Malik)  (of  everything  and  everyone). 
Allah  said, 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :19. 


Surah  h  Al-Fdtihah  (Parti} 


77 


4When  He  made  Prophets  among  you,  and  made  you  kings}  (5:20). 
Also,  the  Two  Sahihs  recorded, 

JU  *p\ 

Just  like  kings  reclining  on  their  thrones^ 


The  Meaning  of  Ad-Din 

Ad-Din  means  the  reckoning,  the  reward  or  punishment. 
Similarly,  Allah  said, 

40  n  that  Day  Allah  will  pay  them  the  (Dinahum)  recompense 
(of  their  deeds)  in  full }  (24:25),  and, 


iShall  we  indeed  (be  raised  up)  to  receive  reward  or  punishment 
(according  to  our  deeds)?}  (37:53).  A  Hadith  stated, 


Jl  UJ  (J jlS  Jl& 


“The  wise  person  is  he  who  reckons  himself  and  works  Jvr  (his 
life)  after  death. »12’ 

meaning,  he  holds  himself  accountable.  Also,  “Umar  said, 
“Hold  yourself  accountable  before  you  are  held  accountable, 
weigh  yourselves  before  you  are  weighed,  and  be  prepared  for 
the  biggest  gathering  before  He  Whose  knowledge  encompasses 
your  deeds, 


iThat  Day  shall  you  be  brought  to  Judgement,  not  a  secret  of 
yours  will  be  hidden}  (69:18).” 


i 


45.  You  we  worship,  and  You  we  ask  for  help.}  (1:5) 


The  Linguistic  and  Religious  Meaning  of  ‘Ibadah 

Linguistically,  ‘Ibadah  means  subdued.  For  instance,  a  road 

Path  Al-Bari  6 :89  and  Muslim  3:1518. 

121  Ibn  Majah  2:1423. 


78_ 


Tafsir  Ibti  Kathtr 

is  described  as  Mu‘abbadah,  meaning,  ‘paved’.  In  religious 
terminology,  ‘Ibadah  implies  the  utmost  love,  humility  and  fear. 


The  Merit  of  stating  the  Object  of  the  Action  before  the 
Doer  of  the  Act,  and  the  Merit  of  these  Negations 


“You...”,  means,  we  worship  You  alone  and  none  else,  and 
rely  on  You  alone  and  none  else.  This  is  the  perfect  form  of 
obedience  and  the  entire  religion  is  implied  by  these  two  ideas. 
Some  of  the  Salaf  said,  Al-Fatihah  is  the  secret  of  the  Qur’an, 
while  these  words  are  the  secret  of  Al-Fatihah, 


45.  You  we  worship,  and  You  we  ask  far  help  from.) 

The  first  part  is  a  declaration  of  innocence  from  Shirk 
(polytheism),  while  the  second  negates  having  any  power  or 
strength,  displaying  the  recognition  that  all  affairs  are 
controlled  by  Allah  alone.  This  meaning  is  reiterated  in  various 
instances  in  the  Qur’an.  For  instance,  Allah  said, 


iSo  worship  Him  (O  Muhammad  sg)  and  put  your  trust  in 
Him.  And  your  Lord  is  not  unaware  of  xohat  you  (people)  do.) 
(11:123), 


4  i&j  .Jj  ll*l» 


iSay:  "He  is  the  Most  Gracious  (Allah),  in  Him  we  believe, 
and  in  Him  we  put  our  trust.")  (67:29), 


4:  fp'kg  iii  v  &) 


i(He  alone  is)  the  Lord  of  the  east  and  the  west;  Ld  ildha  ilia 
Huwa  (none  has  the  right  to  be  worshipped  but  He).  So  take 
Him  alone  as  Wakil  (Disposer  of  your  affairs)),  (73:9),  and, 


i 


J Cm  a\L\) 


iYou  we  worship,  and  You  we  ask  far  help  from). 

We  should  mention  that  in  this  Ayah,  the  type  of  speech 
here  changes  from  the  third  person  to  direct  speech  by  using 
the  Kaf  in  the  statement  Iyyaka  (You).  This  is  because  after 
the  servant  praised  and  thanked  Allah,  he  stands  before  Him, 


Surah  1.  Al-Fatihah  (Part-1) 


79 


addressing  Him  directly; 


i  -fJ j~.xj 


4You  we  worship,  and  You  we  ask  for  help  from}. 


Al-Fatihah  indicates  the  Necessity  of  praising  Allah.  It 
is  required  in  every  Prayer. 


The  beginning  of  Surat  Al-Fatihah  contains  Allah’s  praise  for 
Himself  by  His  most  beautiful  Attributes  and  indicates  to  His 
servants  that,  they  too,  should  praise  Him  in  the  same 
manner.  Hence,  the  prayer  is  not  valid  unless  one  recites  Al- 
Fatihah,  if  he  is  able.  The  Two  Sahihs  recorded  that  TJbadah 
bin  As-Samit  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 

aAjU  \%  p  5VJ,  it 

«There  is  no  valid  prayer  for  whoever  does  not  recite  Al-Fdtifiah 
of  the  Book  y 11 

Also,  it  is  recorded  in  Sahih  Muslim  that  Abu  Hurayrah 
said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  ig  said, 


J.  jZ  sVJJl  iJL^i  :  JU;  ii!l  jfbj 

:  4il  JU  >. jvJliJ'  4ji  ju^JI  :  juUI  JU  IjJ  ijti  U 

:Jli  :4>l  JU  >  ,ji^Jl:jU  lilj 

-X-»S  _*1UL  :  JU  Up  :  «il  JU 

!  JlS  cjb  La  ^XaJj  l  (_£  JUP  l_Lfc  :  JU  .  -  -  -A 

*  try//  .<■'  »  >1  •''**  **'  «  ^  ✓  •  '  t  / 

njJLiJ'  Vj  _At  c. .  «J  n  -_3~  ~  ' 

•jti  U  I  jus  :  JU 


*. Allah  said,  7  divided  the  prayer  into  two  halves  between 
Myself  and  My  servant,  one  half  is  for  Me  and  one  half  for  My 
servant.  My  servant  slwll  have  what  he  asks  for.'  When  the 
servant  says, 

<-r>J  4iJ  J^\} 


4AU  praise  and  thanks  be  to  Allah,  the  Lord  of  all  that  exists.}, 


m 


Fath  Al-Barx  2 :276  and  Muslim  1 :295 . 


80 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Allah  says,  'My  servant  has  praised  Me.'  When  the  servant  says, 

iThe  Most  Gracious,  the  Most  Merciful},  Allah  says,  ‘My 
servant  has  praised  Me/  When  the  servant  says, 

4  j  /J* 


iThe  Owner  of  the  Day  of  Recompense} ,  Allah  says,  ‘My 
servant  has  glorified  Me.'  If  the  servant  says, 


4 


Juju  Jilj| } 


iYou  we  worship,  and  You  we  ask  for  help},  Allah  says,  ' This 
is  betiveen  Me  and  My  servant,  and  My  servant  shall  have 
what  he  asked.'  If  the  servant  says, 


OjJai Jl  | 


iGuide  us  to  the  straight  path.  The  path  of  those  on  whom  You 
have  bestowed  Your  grace,  not  (that)  of  those  who  have  earned 
Your  anger,  nor  of  those  who  went  astray},  Allah  says,  'Tltis  is 
for  My  servant,  and  My  servant  shall  have  what  he  asked Z**1* 


Tawhid  Al-Uluhiyyah 

Ad-Dahhak  narrated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 

4^r*> 

iYou  we  ivorship}  means,  “It  is  You  whom  we  single  out,  Whom  we 
fear  and  Whom  we  hope  in,  You  alone,  our  Lord,  and  none  else. 


Tawhid  Ar-Rububiyyah 


iAnd  You  we  ask  for  help  from},  to  obey  you  and  in  all  of 
our  affairs.”*2'  Further,  Qatadah  said  that  the  Ayah, 


4: 


111  Muslim  1 :297. 

*2'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:19. 


Surah  1 .  Al-Fdtihah  (Part-1) 


81 


4  You  we  worship,  and  You  we  ask  for  help  from ^  “Contains  Allah’s 
command  to  us  to  perform  sincere  worship  for  Him  and  to  seek 
His  aid  concerning  all  of  our  affairs.”*11  Allah  mentioned, 

^JUju 

4 You  xoe  worship }  before, 

4And  You  we  ask  for  help  from},  because  the  objective  here  is  the 
worship,  while  Allah’s  help  is  the  tool  to  implement  this 
objective.  Certainly,  one  first  takes  care  of  the  most  important 
aspects  and  then  what  is  less  important,  and  Allah  knows  best. 

Allah  called  His  Prophet  ^  an  ‘Abd 

Allah  called  His  Messenger  jg  an  ‘Abd  (servant)  when  He 
mentioned  sending  down  His  Book,  the  Prophet’s  involvement 
in  inviting  to  Him,  and  when  mentioning  the  Isra’  (overnight 
journey  from  Makkah  to  Jerusalem  and  then  to  heaven),  and 
these  are  the  Prophet’s  most  honorable  missions.  Allah  said, 

4^ J\  £  $  a#  k 

4AU  praise  and  thanks  be  to  Allah,  Who  has  sent  down  to  His 
servant  (Multammad  sg)  the  Book  (the  Qur’an)}  (18:1), 

4‘j* il*  k  ^  ’k-)  ^ 

4 And  ivhen  the  servant  of  Allah  ( Muhammad  is)  stood  up 
invoking  Him  (his  Lord  -  Allah  in  prayer)},  (72:19)  and, 

iii  xsk 

4Clorified  (and  Exalted)  be  He  (Allah)  (above  all  that  they 
associate  with  Him)  Who  took  His  servant  (Muhammad  jg)  for 
a  journey  by  night}  (17:1). 

Encouraging  the  Performance  of  the  Acts  of  Worship 
during  Times  of  Distress 

Allah  also  recommended  that  His  Prophet  jg  resort  to  acts  of 
worship  during  times  when  he  felt  distressed  because  of  the 


111  Ibid.  1  :20 . 


82 


Tafsir  Wn  Kgthtr 


disbelievers  who  defied  and  denied  him.  Allah  said, 

i *  J?  %>  4k  ip  k  &&  Ut  &  % 


4 Indeed ,  We  know  that  your  breast  is  straitened  at  what  they 
say.  So  glorify  the  praises  of  your  Lord  and  be  of  those  who 
prostrate  themselves  (to  Him).  And  worship  your  Lord  until 
there  comes  tttito  you  the  certainty  ( i.e .  death)}  (15:97-99). 

Why  Praise  was  mentioned  First 

Since  the  praise  of  Allah,  Who  is  being  sought  for  help,  was 
mentioned,  it  was  appropriate  that  one  follows  the  praise  by 
asking  for  his  need.  We  stated  that  Allah  said, 

“One  Iwlf  for  Myself  and  one  half  far  My  servant,  and  My 
servant  shall  luwe  what  he  asked.* 


This  is  the  best  method  for  seeking  help,  by  first  praising 
the  one  whom  help  is  sought  from  and  then  asking  for  His 
aid,  and  help  for  one’s  self,  and  for  his  Muslim  brethren  by 
saying. 

4  .*; v  «U 


4Guide  us  to  the  straight  path.} 

This  method  is  more  appropriate  and  efficient  in  bringing 
about  a  positive  answer  to  the  pleas,  and  this  is  why  Allah 
recommended  this  better  method. 

Asking  for  help  may  take  the  form  of  conveying  the  condition 
of  the  person  who  is  seeking  help.  For  instance,  the  Prophet 
Moses  said, 

p  cy,  J)  Zi  k. 


4My  Lord!  Truly,  I  am  in  need  of  whatever  good  that  You 
bestow  on  me!}  (28:24). 


Also,  one  may  first  mention  the  attributes  of  whoever  is 
being  asked,  such  as  what  Dhun-NQn  said, 


4Ld  ildha  ilia  Anta  (none  has  the  right  to  be  worshipped  but 
You  (O  Allah)),  Glorified  (and  Exalted)  be  You  (above  all  that 


Surah  1.  Al-Fatihah  (Part-1) 


83 


they  associate  with  You)!  Truly,  I  have  been  of  the  wrongdoers} 
(21:87). 

Further,  one  may  praise  Him  without  mentioning  what  he 
needs. 


The  Meaning  of  Guidance  mentioned  in  the  Surah 

The  guidance  mentioned  in  the  Surah  implies  being  directed 
and  guided  to  success.  Allah  said, 

{Guide  us  to  the  straight  path}  meaning  guide,  direct,  lead  and 
grant  us  the  correct  guidance.  Also, 

isSlZj} 


{ And  shown  him  the  two  ways  (good  and  evil)?}  (90:10),  means, 
*We  explained  to  him  the  paths  of  good  and  evil.’  Also,  Allah 
said. 


{He  (Allah)  chose  him  (as  an  intimate  friend)  and  guided  him 
to  a  straight  path}  (16:121),  and, 


{ And  lead  them  on  to  the  way  of  flaming  Fire  (Hell)}  (37:23). 
Similarly,  Allah  said. 


>>?  Jl  vf?  30 

{And  verily,  you  (O  Muhammad  jg)  are  indeed  guiding 
(mankind)  to  the  straight  path}  (42:52),  and, 


{All  praise  and  tlwnks  be  to  Allah,  Who  has  guided  us  to  this} 
(7:43), 

meaning,  guided  us  and  directed  us  and  qualified  us  for  this 
end  -  Paradise. 


The  Meaning  of  As-Sirat  Al-Mustaqim,  the  Straight 
Path. 

As  for  the  meaning  of  As-Sirat  Al-Mustaqim,  Imam  Abu  Ja*far 


At-Tabari  said,  “The  Ummah  agreed  that  Sir&t  Al-Mustaqim,  is 
the  clear  path  without  branches,  according  to  the  language  of 
the  Arabs.  For  instance,  Jarir  bin  ‘Atiyah  Al-Khatafi  said  in  a 
poem,  The  Leader  of  the  faithful  is  on  a  path  that  will  remain 
straight  even  though  the  other  paths  are  crooked.”  At-Tabari 
also  stated  that,  “There  are  many  evidences  to  this  fact.”  At- 
Tabari  then  proceeded,  “The  Arabs  use  the  term,  Sirat  in 
reference  to  every  deed  and  statement  whether  righteous  or 
wicked.  Hence  the  Arabs  would  describe  the  honest  person  as 
being  straight  and  the  wicked  person  as  being  crooked.  The 
straight  path  mentioned  in  the  Qur’an  refers  to  Islam.*1' 

Imam  Ahmad  recorded  in  his  Musnad  that  An-Nawwas  bin 
Sam'an  said  that  the  Prophet  said, 


«— 11^-*  Jljji  1>\ jjai I  J  4  U»l>»  <5.1  i Ls'jJsb 

ilji  Ijji  jf-jj  J  4  \ji-yC  Vj 

^4  01  iL?li  U&  V  iliJi  :  JU  iu ;  ^  M  OLi^j 

JJUS;  4.1  fjUJ  «i>'  ij-ii  :  OG^iJlj 

^  4.1  ipij  o* 


«Allalt  has  set  an  example:  a  Sirat  (straight  path)  that  is 
surrounded  by  two  walls  on  both  sides,  with  several  open  doors 
within  the  walls  covered  with  curtains.  There  is  a  caller  on  the 
gate  of  the  Sirat  who  heralds,  ’O  people!  Stay  on  the  path  and 
do  not  deviate  from  it.'  Meanwhile,  a  caller  from  above  the  path 
is  also  warning  any  person  who  wants  to  open  any  of  these 
doors,  Woe  unto  you!  Do  not  open  it,  for  if  you  open  it  you 
will  pass  through.'  The  straight  path  is  Islam,  the  two  walls  are 
Allah's  set  limits,  while  the  doors  resemble  what  Allah  has 
prohibited.  Tlte  caller  on  the  gate  of  the  Sirat  is  the  Book  of 
Allah,  while  the  caller  above  the  Sirat  is  Allah’s  admonishment 
in  the  heart  of  every  Muslim  .»*2* 


111  At-Tabari  1:170. 
|2)  Ahmad  4: 182. 


85 


Surah  1,  Al-Fdtihah  (Part-1 ) 


The  Faithful  ask  for  and  abide  by  Guidance 


If  someone  asks,  “Why  does  the  believer  ask  Allah  for 
guidance  during  every  prayer  and  at  other  times,  while  he  is 
already  properly  guided?  Has  he  not  already  acquired 
guidance?” 

The  answer  to  these  questions  is  that  if  it  were  not  a  fact 
that  the  believer  needs  to  keep  asking  for  guidance  day  and 
night,  Allah  would  not  have  directed  him  to  invoke  Him  to 
acquire  the  guidance.  The  servant  needs  Allah  the  Exalted 
every  hour  of  his  life  to  help  him  remain  firm  on  the  path  of 
guidance  and  to  make  him  even  more  firm  and  persistent  on 
it.  The  servant  does  not  have  the  power  to  benefit  or  harm 
himself,  except  by  Allah’s  permission.  Therefore,  Allah  directed 
the  servant  to  invoke  Him  constantly,  so  that  He  provides  him 
with  His  aid  and  with  firmness  and  success.  Indeed,  the 
happy  person  is  he  whom  Allah  guides  to  ask  of  Him.  This  is 
especially  the  case  if  a  person  urgently  needs  Allah’s  help  day 
or  night.  Allah  said, 


tS-J'  «— jit  4/jil  Lj^S  ^ 

<3?  «  & 


you  who  believe!  Believe  in  Allah,  and  His  Messenger 
(Muhammad  and  the  Book  (the  Qur'an)  which  He  has  sent 
down  to  His  Messenger,  and  the  Scripture  which  He  sent  down 
to  those  before  (him)}  (4:16). 

Therefore,  in  this  Ayah  Allah  commanded  the  believers  to 
believe,  and  this  command  is  not  redundant  since  what  is 
sought  here  is  firmness  and  continuity  of  performing  the  deeds 
that  help  one  remain  on  the  path  of  faith.  Also,  Allah 
commanded  His  believing  servants  to  proclaim, 


'A  h:  ki  oj  a  iij  a;z  i* 


iOur  Lord!  Let  not  our  hearts  deviate  (from  the  truth)  after 
You  have  guided  us,  and  grant  us  mercy  from  You.  Truly, 
You  are  the  Bestower .}  (3:8).  Hence, 

ill 


iGuide  us  to  the  straight  way }  means,  “Make  us  firm  on  the  path 
of  guidance  and  do  not  allow  us  to  deviate  from  it.” 


86 


Tafsir  Ibti  Kathir 


4^05) L-iJ'  Vj  j»^lc  Oj^JuJl  |»4ll*  Mul  Cjl/jJ' 


47.  The  way  of  those  upon  whom  You  have  bestowed  Your 
grace,  not  (that)  of  those  who  earned  Your  anger,  nor  of  those 
who  went  astray}. 


We  mentioned  the  ffadith  in  which  the  servant  proclaims, 


ir£'4$\  loJ 


iGuide  us  to  the  straight  way}  and  Allah  says,  “This  is  for  My 
servant,  and  My  servant  shall  acquire  what  he  asks  for.”  Allah’s 
statement. 

4|1  &■)&  ^Oj-fo} 

iThe  way  of  those  upon  whom  You  have  bestowed  Your  grace} 
defines  the  path.  Those  upon  whom  Allah  has  bestowed  His 
grace’  are  those  mentioned  in  Surat  An-Nisa’  (chapter  4),  when 
Allah  said, 


iAnd  whoever  obeys  Allah  and  the  Messenger  (Muhammad 
3&J,  then  they  will  be  in  the  company  of  those  on  whom  Allah 
has  bestowed  His  grace,  the  Prophets,  the  Siddiqin  (the  truly 
faithful),  the  martyrs,  and  the  righteous.  And  how  excellent 
these  companions  are!  Such  is  the  bounty  from  Allah,  and  Allah 
is  sufficient  to  blow}  (4:69-70). 

Allah’s  statement, 

iNot  (tlte  way)  of  those  who  earned  Your  anger,  nor  of  those 
who  went  astray  } 

meaning  guide  us  to  the  straight  path,  the  path  of  those  upon 
whom  you  have  bestowed  Your  grace,  that  is,  the  people  of 
guidance,  sincerity  and  obedience  to  Allah  and  His 
Messengers.  They  are  the  people  who  adhere  to  Allah’s 
commandments  and  refrain  from  committing  what  He  has 
prohibited.  But,  help  us  to  avoid  the  path  of  those  whom  Allah 
is  angry  with,  whose  intentions  are  corrupt,  who  know  the 
truth,  yet  deviate  from  it.  Also,  help  us  avoid  the  path  of  those 


87 


Surah  2.  Al-Fdtihah  (Part-1) 

who  were  led  astray,  who  lost  the  true  knowledge  and,  as  a 
result,  are  wandering  in  misguidance,  unable  to  find  the 
correct  path.  Allah  asserted  that  the  two  paths  He  described 
here  are  both  misguided  when  He  repeated  the  negation  ‘not’. 
These  two  paths  are  the  paths  of  the  Christians  and  Jews,  a 
fact  that  the  believer  should  beware  of  so  that  he  avoids  them. 
The  path  of  the  believers  is  knowledge  of  the  truth  and  abiding 
by  it.  In  comparison,  the  Jews  abandoned  practicing  the 
religion,  while  the  Christians  lost  the  true  knowledge.  This  is 
why  ‘anger’  descended  upon  the  Jews,  while  being  described 
as  led  astray’  is  more  appropriate  of  the  Christians.  Those 
who  know,  but  avoid  implementing  the  truth,  deserve  the 
anger,  unlike  those  who  are  ignorant.  The  Christians  want  to 
seek  the  true  knowledge,  but  are  unable  to  find  it  because 
they  did  not  seek  it  from  its  proper  resources.  This  is  why 
they  were  led  astray.  We  should  also  mention  that  both  the 
Christians  and  the  Jews  have  earned  the  anger  and  are  led 
astray,  but  the  anger  is  one  of  the  attributes  more  particular 
of  the  Jews.  Allah  said  about  the  Jews, 

ii'  i£j 


iThose  (Jews)  who  incurred  the  curse  of  Allah  and  His  wrath } 
(5:60). 

The  attribute  that  the  Christians  deserve  most  is  that  of 
being  led  astray,  just  as  Allah  said  about  them, 


iWho  went  astray  before  and  who  misled  many,  and  strayed 
(themselves)  from  the  right  path}  (5:77). 

There  are  several  Hadiths  and  reports  from  the  Salaf  on  this 
subject.  Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  ‘Adi  bin  Hatim  said,  “The 
horsemen  of  the  Messenger  of  Allah  seized  my  paternal  aunt 
and  some  other  people.  When  they  brought  them  to  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  3^5,  they  were  made  to  stand  in  line  before 
him.  My  aunt  said,  ‘O  Messenger  of  Allah!  The  supporter  is  far 
away,  the  offspring  have  stopped  coming  and  I  am  an  old 
woman,  unable  to  serve.  Grant  me  your  favor,  may  Allah  grant 
you  His  favor.’  He  said,  ‘Who  is  your  supporter?’  She  said,  ‘Adi 
bin  Hatim.’  He  said.  The  one  who  ran  away  from  Allah  and  His 
Messenger?’  She  said,  ‘So,  the  Prophet  jfe  freed  me.’  When  the 


88 


Tafsir  l_bn  Kathir 

Prophet  jg  came  back,  there  was  a  man  next  to  him,  I  think 
that  he  was  ‘Ali,  who  said  to  her,  ‘Ask  him  for  a  means  of 
transportation.’  She  asked  the  Prophet  fg,  and  he  ordered  that 
she  be  given  an  animal.”  ‘Adi  then  said,  “Later  on,  she  came  to 
me  and  said,  ‘He  (Muhammad  sg)  has  done  a  favor  that  your 
father  (who  was  a  generous  man)  would  never  have  done.  So 
and-so  person  came  to  him  and  he  granted  him  his  favor,  and 
so-and-so  came  to  him  and  he  granted  him  his  favor.’  So  I  went 
to  the  Prophet  jg  and  found  that  some  women  and  children 
were  gathering  with  him,  so  close  that  I  knew  that  he  was  not  a 
king  like  Kisra  (King  of  Persia)  or  Caesar.  He  said,  ‘O  ‘Adi!  What 
made  you  run  away,  so  that  La  ilaha  Wallah  is  not  proclaimed? 
Is  there  a  deity  worthy  of  worship  except  Allah?  What  made  you 
run  away,  so  that  AUa.hu  Akbar  (Allah  is  the  Greater)  is  not 
proclaimed?  Is  there  anything  Greater  than  Allah?’  I  proclaimed 
my  Islam  and  I  saw  his  face  radiate  with  pleasure  and  he  said: 

jJCiJl  jj  j  j'Ae-  jJaJj, Jl  jin 

“Those  who  have  earned  the  anger  are  the  Jews  and  those  who 
are  led  astray  are  the  Christians. »” 

This  Hadith  was  also  collected  by  At-Tirmidhi  who  said  that 
it  is  Hasan  Ghanb  J1' 

Also,  when  Zayd  bin  ‘Amr  bin  Nufayl  went  with  some  of  his 
friends  -  before  Islam  -  to  Ash-Sham  seeking  the  true  religion, 
the  Jews  said  to  him,  “You  will  not  become  a  Jew  unless  you 
carry  a  share  of  the  anger  of  Allah  that  we  have  earned.”  He 
said,  “I  am  seeking  to  escape  Allah’s  anger.”  Also,  the 
Christians  said  to  him,  “If  you  become  one  of  us  you  will  carry 
a  share  in  Allah’s  discontent.”  He  said,  “I  cannot  bear  it.”  So 
he  remained  in  his  pure  nature  and  avoided  worshipping  the 
idols  and  the  polytheistic  practices.  He  became  neither  a  Jew, 
nor  Christian.  As  for  his  companions,  they  became  Christians 
because  they  found  it  more  pure  than  Judaism.  Waraqah  bin 
Nawfal  was  among  these  people  until  Allah  guided  him  by  the 
hand  of  His  Prophet  jg,  when  he  was  sent  as  Prophet,  and 
Waraqah  believed  in  the  revelation  that  was  sent  to  the  Prophet 
jg  may  Allah  be  pleased  with  him. 

***  Ahmad  4 :378 ,  and  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8 :289 . 


Surah  2_.  Al-Fdtihah  (Part-1) 


89 


The  Summary  of  Al-Fatihah 

The  honorable  Surah  Al-Fatihah  contains  seven  Ayat 
including  the  praise  and  thanks  of  Allah,  glorifying  Him  and 
praising  Him  by  mentioning  His  most  Beautiful  Names  and 
most  high  Attributes.  It  also  mentions  the  Hereafter,  which  is 
the  Day  of  Resurrection,  and  directs  Allah’s  servants  to  ask  of 
Him,  invoking  Him  and  declaring  that  all  power  and  strength 
comes  from  Him.  It  also  calls  to  the  sincerity  of  the  worship  of 
Allah  alone,  singling  Him  out  in  His  divinity,  believing  in  His 
perfection,  being  free  from  the  need  o  any  partners,  having  no 
rivals  nor  equals.  Al-Fatihah  directs  the  believers  to  invoke 
Allah  to  guide  them  to  the  straight  path,  which  is  the  true 
religion,  and  to  help  them  remain  on  that  path  in  this  life,  and 
to  pass  over  the  actual  Sirat  (bridge  over  hell  that  everyone 
must  pass  over)  on  the  Day  of  Judgment.  On  that  Day,  the 
believers  will  be  directed  to  the  gardens  of  comfort  in  the 
company  of  the  Prophets,  the  truthful  ones,  the  martyrs  and 
the  righteous.  Al-Fatihah  also  encourages  performing  good 
deeds,  so  that  the  believers  will  be  in  the  company  of  the 
good-doers  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection.  The  Surah  also  warns 
against  following  the  paths  of  misguidance,  so  that  one  does 
not  end  up  being  gathered  with  those  who  indulge  in  sin,  on 
the  Day  of  Resurrection,  including  those  who  have  earned  the 
anger  and  those  who  were  led  astray. 


The  Bounties  are  because  of  Allah,  not  the  Deviations 


Allah  said. 


i/if  X^ 


iThe  way  of  those  upon  whom  you  have  bestowed  Your  graced,  when 
He  mentioned  His  favor.  On  mentioning  anger,  Allah  said, 

y  »  jl  •Z*' 


iNot  (that)  of  those  who  earned  Your  anger},  without  mentioning 
the  subject,  although  it  is  He  Who  has  sent  down  the  anger  on 
them,  just  as  Allah  stated  in  another  Ayah, 


4 Have  you  (O  Multammad  not  seen  those  (hypocrites)  who 
take  as  friends  a  people  upon  whom  is  the  wrath  of  Allah  (i.e. 


90 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Jews)?}  (58:14). 

Also,  Allah  relates  the  misguidance  of  those  who  indulged  in 
it,  although  they  were  justly  misguided  according  to  Allah’s 
appointed  destiny.  For  instance,  Allah  said, 


V-^iS  wj  W  M  **>'  ^r.  <>*r 


<He  u>/iom  Alldlt  guides,  he  is  the  rightly-guided;  but  he  whom 
He  sends  astray,  for  him  you  will  find  no  Wall  (guiding  friend) 
to  lead  him  (to  the  right  path)}  (18:17) 


and. 


4 Whomsoever  Allah  sends  astray,  none  can  guide  him;  and  He 
lets  them  wander  blindly  in  their  transgression}  (7:186). 

These  and  severed  other  Ayat  testify  to  the  fact  that  Allah 
alone  is  the  One  Who  guides  and  misguides,  contrary  to  the 
belief  of  the  Qadariyyah  sect,  who  claimed  that  the  servants 
choose  and  create  their  own  destiny.  They  rely  on  some 
unclear  Ayat  avoiding  what  is  clear  and  contradicts  their 
desires.  Theirs,  is  the  method  of  the  people  who  follow  their 
lust,  desire  and  wickedness.  An  authentic  HadUh  narrated. 


^jjJl  kl 41*  AjLlj  U  j  lit* 


«1 Nhen  you  see  those  who  follow  what  is  not  so  clear  in  it  (the 
Qur’an),  then  they  are  those  whom  Allah  has  mentioned  (refer 
to  3:7).  Hence,  avoid 


The  Prophet  jg  was  referring  to  Allah’s  statement, 


4So  as  for  those  in  whose  hearts  there  is  a  deviation  (from  the 
truth)  they  follmo  that  which  is  not  entirely  clear  thereof, 
seeking  Al-Fitnah  (polytheism  and  trials),  and  seeking  for  its 
hidden  meanings}{ 3:7). 

Verily,  no  innovator  in  the  religion  could  ever  rely  on  any 
authentic  evidence  in  the  Qur’an  that  testifies  to  his 
innovation.  The  Qur’an  came  to  distinguish  between  truth  and 
falsehood,  and  guidance  and  misguidance.  The  Qur’an  does 


1,1  Fath  Al-Bari  8 :57 . 


91 


Surah  1 ,  Al-Fatihah  (Portal ) 

not  contain  any  discrepancies  or  contradictions,  because  it  is 
a  revelation  from  the  Most  Wise,  Worthy  of  all  praise. 

Saying  Amin 

It  is  recommended  to  say  Amin  after  finishing  the  recitation 
of  Al-Fatihah.  Amin  means,  “O  Allah!  Accept  our  invocation.” 
The  evidence  that  saying  Amin  is  recommended  is  contained  in 
what  Imams  Ahmad,  Abu  Dawud  and  At-Tirmidhi  recorded, 
that  Wa’il  bin  Hujr  said,  “I  heard  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg 
recite, 


$Not  (that)  of  those  who  earned  Your  anger,  nor  of  those  who 
went  astray^,  and  he  said  ‘Amin’  extending  it  with  his 
voice.”1 11 

Abu  Dawud’s  narration  added,  “Raising  his  voice  with  it.”  At- 
Tirmidhi  then  commented  that  this  Hadith  is  Hasan  and  was 
also  narrated  from  ‘Ali  and  Ibn  Mas'ud121  .  Also,  Abu  Hurayrah 
narrated  that  whenever  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  would  recite, 

iNot  (the  way)  of  those  who  earned  Your  anger,  nor  of  those  who 
went  astray He  would  say  Amin  until  those  who  were  behind 
him  in  the  first  line  could  hear  him.131 

Abu  Dawud  and  Ibn  M&jah  recorded  this  Hadith  with  the 
addition,  “Then  the  Masjid  would  shake  because  of  (those 
behind  the  Prophet  jg)  reciting  Amin.”141  Also,  Ad-Daraqutni 
recorded  this  Hadith  and  commented  that  it  is  Hasan.  Further, 
Bilal  nan-ated  that  he  said,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah!  Do  not  finish 
saying  Amin  before  I  can  join  you.”15*  This  was  recorded  by  Abu 
Dawud.161 

In  addition,  Abu  Nasr  Al-Qushayri  narrated  that  Al-Hasan 
and  JaTar  As-Sadiq  stressed  the  ‘m’  in  Amin. 


111  Ahmad  4 :315,  Abu  Dawud  1 :574,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  2 :67. 
121  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  2:67. 

131  Abu  Dawud  1 :575. 

141  Abu  Dawud  1 :575,  Ibn  Majah  1 :279. 

151  Ad-Daraqupii  1 :335 
161  Abu  Dawud  1 :576. 


92 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathtr 


Saying  Amin  is  recommended  for  those  who  are  not  praying 
(when  reciting  Al-Fatihah)  and  is  strongly  recommended  for 
those  who  are  praying,  whether  alone  or  behind  the  Imam. 
The  Two  Sahihs  recorded  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


•jJi  j*  {Jji  U  aJ  3**  a&^aJI  a^aI;  ^ilj  i.  fu^l  j*\ 

aWhett  the  Imam  says,  '  Antin' ,  then  say,  ’Amin',  because 
whoever  says,  Amin’  with  the  angels,  his  previous  sins  will  be 
forgiven.^1' 

Muslim  recorded  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  £g  said, 


:.UU i  J  i&SLJlj  >.jJ 


^  (Jii  lil® 

U  aJ  'jii- UaIj^J 


«When  any  of  you  says  in  the  prayer,  ’ Amin  '  and  the  angels 
in  heaven  say,  'Amin',  in  unison,  his  previous  sins  will  be 

forgiven. 

It  was  said  that  the  Hadith  talks  about  both  the  angels  and  the 
Muslims  saying  Amin  at  the  same  time.  The  Hadith  also  refers  to 
when  the  Anuhs  said  by  the  angels  and  the  Muslims  are  equally 
sincere  (thus  bringing  about  forgiveness).  Further,  it  is  recorded  in 
Sahth  Muslim  that  Abu  Musa  related  to  the  Prophet  jg  that  he 
said, 


<&l  ij  fU'ijl  -  Jli  li)» 


’When  the  Imam  says,  'Walad-dallin' ,  say,  'Amin'  and  Allah 
will  answer  your  invocation  .»,3) 


In  addition,  At-Tirmidhi  said  that  ‘ Amin ’  means,  “Do  not 
disappoint  our  hope”,  while  the  majority  of  scholars  said  that 
it  means.  “Answer  our  invocation.” 

Also,  in  his  Musnad,  Imfim  Ahmad  recorded  that  ‘A’ishah 
said  that  when  the  Jews  were  mentioned  to  him,  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  5§  said, 


I 1(5  J&l  Uti*  a«aj>JI  (J5p  U jxL>u  Ui  Ujxl»w  j5  • 

:fw[i  \jb.j  1*5  ill  &j£  J\  libit  JUj 


I1'  FathAl-BGri  11 :203  and  Muslim  1 :307. 

Muslim  1 :307 . 

131  Muslim  1 :303. 


Surah  1.  Al-Fatihah  (Portal} 


93 


' They  will  not  envy  us  for  anything  more  than  tltey  envy  us 
for  Friday  which  we  have  beeti  guided  to,  while  they  were  led 
astray  from  it,  and  for  the  Qiblah  which  we  were  guided  to, 
while  they  were  led  astray  from  it,  and  for  our  saying  'Amin' 
behind  the  Imam .»[I1 


Also,  Ibn  Majah  recorded  this  Hadith  with  the  wording, 


'‘The  Jews  have  never  envied  you  more  than  for  uour  saying  the 
Saldm  (Islamic  greeting)  and  for  saying  Amfn.»(2' 


1,1  Ahmad  6:134 
121  Ibn  Majah  2:278. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Part-1 ) 


95 


Tafsir  of  