# Tafsir Ibn Kathir (Darussalam abridged English) — Q002 al-Baqara
# Source: archive.org/details/tafsir-ibn-kathir-10.-Volumes
# Vol 1 (Q2:1-252) + Vol 2 (Q2:253-286)

## === VOLUME 1: Q2:1-252 ===

Surat  Al-Baqarah 
(Chapter  2) 

Which  was  revealed  in  Al-Madlnah 


The  Virtues  of 
Surat  Al-Baqarah 

In  Musnad  Ahmad, 
Sahih  Muslim,  At- 
Tirmidhi  and  An- 
Nasa’i,  it  is  recorded 
that  Abu  Hurayrah 
said  that  the  Prophet 
said, 

<£4P* 

C  jUallil  aJl>-JO  V 

«Do  no/  him  yoi/r 
houses  into  graves .  Ve¬ 
rify,  S/wy/on  does  no/ 
en/er  the  house  where 
Surat  Al-Baqarah  is 
recited .  *  At-Tirmidhi 
said,  “Hasan  Sahih) 1 11 
Also,  ‘Abdullah  bin 
Mas'ud  said, 
“Shaytan  flees  from 
the  house  where 
Surat  Al-Baqarah  is 
heard.”  This  Hadith  was  collected  by  An-Nasal  in  Al-Yawm 
wal-Laylah  and  Al-Hakim  recorded  it  in  his  Mustadrak,  and 
then  said  that  its  chain  of  narration  is  authentic,  although  the 

flj  Ahmad  2:284,  Muslim  1  :539,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8 :180,  An-Nasal 
in  Al-Kubra  5:13. 

^  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  5:13. 


96 _ Tafsir  Ibn  Katlnr 

Two  Sahihs  did  not  collect  it.111  In  his  Musnad ,  Ad-Darimi 
recorded  that  Ibn  Mas*ud  said,  “Shaytan  departs  the  house 
where  Surat  Al-Baqarah  is  being  recited,  and  as  he  leaves,  he 
passes  gas.”  Ad-Darimi  also  recorded  that  Ash-ShaTn  said  that 
‘Abdullah  bin  MasTid  said,  “Whoever  recites  ten  Ay  at  from 
Surat  Al-Baqarah  in  a  night,  then  Shaytan  will  not  enter  his 
house  that  night.  (These  ten  Ayat  are)  four  from  the  beginning, 
Ayat  Al-Kursi  (255),  the  following  two  Ayat  (256-257)  and  the 
last  three  Ayat”  In  another  narration,  Ibn  Masftd  said,  “Then 
Shaytan  will  not  come  near  him  or  his  family,  nor  will  he  be 
touched  by  anything  that  he  dislikes.  Also,  if  these  Ayat  were 
to  be  recited  over  a  senile  person,  they  would  wake  him 
up.”*2! 

Further,  Sahl  bin  Sa‘d  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  said, 


(J  ^  jV)  jlull  Ojj  4 


jU 


« Everything  has  a  hump  (or,  high  peek),  aiul  Al-Baqarah  is  the 
high  peek  of  the  Qur'an.  Whoever  recites  Al-Baqarah  at  night  in 
his  house,  then  Shaytan  ivill  not  enter  that  house  for  three 
nights.  Whoever  recites  it  during  a  day  in  his  house,  then 
Shaytan  will  not  enter  that  house  for  three  days .« 

This  Hadith  was  collected  by  Abu  Al-Qasim  At-Tabarani,  Abu 
Hatim  Ibn  Hibban  in  his  Sahih  and  Ibn  Mfirduwyah.'31 

At-Tirmidhi,  An-Nasa’i  and  Ibn  Majah  recorded  that  Abu 
Hurayrah  said,  “The  Messenger  of  Allah  sent  an  expedition 
force  comprising  of  many  men  and  asked  each  about  what 
they  memorized  of  the  Qur’an.  The  Prophet  jg  came  to  one  of 
the  youngest  men  among  them  and  asked  him,  What  have  you 
memorized  (of  the  Qur’an)  young  man?’  He  said,  1  memorized 
such  and  such  Surahs  and  also  Al-Baqarah.’  The  Prophet  Jfe 
said,  *You  memorized  Surat  Al-Baqarah?’  He  said,  “Yes.’  The 
Prophet  said,  Then  you  are  their  commander.’  One  of  the 
noted  men  (or  chiefs)  commented,  ‘By  Allah!  I  did  not  learn 
Surat  Al-Baqarah,  for  fear  that  I  would  not  be  able  to 


111  Al-tfakim  2:260. 

121  Ad-Darimi  2  :322 . 

*31  At-Tabarani  6:163  and  Ibn  Hibban  2 :78. 


implement  it.  The  Messenger  of  Allah  0  said, 

*i  fVj  ‘\y>*  i. o _>*y '3 

it>r  i J  J*  $*'i  <J*  ^  ^hj  £j*i  &~i 

n^LLj  l}*  £ j\  w-l> 

« Learn  Al-Qur'an  and  recite  it,  for  the  example  of  whoever 
learns  the  Qur'an,  recites  it  and  adheres  to  it,  is  the  example  of 
a  bag  that  is  full  of  musk  whose  scent  fills  the  air.  The  example 
of  whoever  learns  the  Qur'an  and  then  sleeps  (i.e.  lazy)  while 
the  Qur'an  is  in  his  memory,  is  the  example  of  a  bag  that  has 
musk,  but  is  closed  tight." 

This  is  the  wording  collected  by  At-Tirmidhi,  who  said  that 
this  HacLith  is  Hasan.  In  another  narration,  At-Tirmidhi 
recorded  this  same  Hadith  in  a  Mursal  manner,  so  Allah 
knows  best.'1* 

Also,  Al-Bukhari  recorded  that  Usayd  bin  Hudayr  said  that 
he  was  once  reciting  Surat  Al-Baqarah  while  his  horse  was  tied 
next  to  him.  The  horse  started  to  make  some  noise.  When 
Usayd  stopped  reciting,  the  horse  stopped  moving  about. 
When  he  resumed  reading,  the  horse  started  moving  about 
again.  When  he  stopped  reciting,  the  horse  stopped  moving, 
and  when  he  resumed  reading,  the  horse  started  to  move 
again.  Meanwhile,  his  son  Yahya  was  close  to  the  horse,  and 
he  feared  that  the  horse  might  step  on  him.  When  he  moved 
his  son  back,  he  looked  up  to  the  sky  and  saw  a  cloud 
radiating  with  light  that  looked  like  lamps.  In  the  morning,  he 
went  to  the  Prophet  0  and  told  him  what  had  happened  and 
then  said,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah!  My  son  Yahya  was  close  to 
the  horse  and  I  feared  that  she  might  step  on  him.  When  I 
attended  to  him  and  raised  my  head  to  the  sky,  I  saw  a  cloud 
with  lights  like  lamps.  So  I  went,  but  I  couldn’t  see  it.”  The 
Prophet  5g  said,  “Do  you  know  what  that  was?”  He  said,  “No.” 
The  Prophet  0  said, 

i  il£Jl  ^dll  'J&  Jj  oiS  iiL;« 


Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8:186,  An-Nasa’i  in  Al-Kubrd  5:227,  and  Ibn 
Majah  1:78. 


98 


Tajsir  Ibn  Katlnr 

“They  were  the  angels,  they  came  close  hearing  your  voice 
(reciting  Surat  Al-Baqarah),  and  if  you  had  kept  reading,  the 
people  would  have  been  able  to  see  the  angels  when  the  morning 
came,  and  the  angels  would  not  be  hidden  from  their  eyes. »• 11 

This  is  the  narration  reported  by  Imam  Abu  Ubayd  Al-Qasim 
bin  Salam  in  his  book  Fad&’il  Al-Qur’an. 


Virtues  of  Surat  Al-Baqarah  and  Surat  Al  'Imran 


Imam  Ahmad  said  that  Abu  Nu'aym  narrated  to  them  that 
Bishr  bin  Muhajir  said  that  ‘Abdullah  bin  Buraydah  narrated 
to  him  from  his  father,  “I  was  sitting  with  the  Prophet  and  I 
heard  him  say, 


* iiiaj I  ,i  7  j  i  \4Sjj 


11  Learn  Surat  Al-Baqarah,  because  in  learning  it  there  is 
blessing,  in  ignoring  it  there  is  sorrow,  and  the  sorceresses 
cannot  memorize  it.* 


He  kept  silent  for  a  while  and  then  said, 


fji  j J \j  yfQ\  5j jL.  \ fJjc* 

(y.  djj  j*  j\  j£lJ.  jl  jliilli  i 

U  -Jy^t  Ja  :  <J  J jij  15  ay  -is-  iiUiJl 

•iiilJ  \j  'Ji  kltliisi  ^jjl  jl^ijl  JjCa-Uj  uf  '-JjQ 

tbj  J*  J  ir!  ^13 

^yt  V  ljUIa-  l  jliJJl  1  j  aJILjj  jUU^JIj  4] .  k>  ..i 

•  JtL  ^  U5jJ j  jj-L  :  Jlili  ?ljw  U~~S  Uj  , Ujjjl  Jif  1-^1 

J'  Iji  ' jjj  yj  i  ^  jjw>l J  lyl 


'•Learn  Surat  Al-Baqarah  and  Al  'Imran  because  they  are  two 
lights  and  they  shade  their  people  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection, 
just  as  two  clouds,  two  spaces  of  shade  or  two  lines  of  (flying) 
birds.  The  Qur’an  will  meet  its  companion  in  the  shape  of  a 
pale-faced  man  on  tlte  Day  of  Resurrection  when  his  grave  is 
opened.  The  Qur'an  will  ask  him,  'Do  you  knorv  me?’  The  man 
will  say,  7  do  not  know  you.’  The  Qur'an  will  say,  7  am  your 


m 


Fath  Al-B&ri  8 :680 


99 


Surah  2.  ATBagamh  (1  -  24)  (Part-1) 


companion,  the  Qur'an,  which  has  brought  you  thirst  during 
the  heat  and  made  you  stay  up  during  the  night.  Every 
merchant  has  his  certain  trade.  But,  this  Day,  you  are  behind 
all  types  of  trade.'  Kingship  will  then  be  given  to  him  in  his 
right  hand,  eternal  life  in  his  left  hand  and  the  croion  of  grace 
will  be  placed  on  his  head.  His  parents  will  also  be  granted  two 
garments  that  the  people  of  this  life  could  never  afford.  They 
will  say,  'Why  were  we  granted  these  garments?’  It  will  be 
said,  'Because  your  son  was  carrying  the  Qur'an.'  It  will  be 
said  (to  the  reader  of  the  Qur'an),  ’Read  and  ascend  through  the 
levels  of  Paradise.'  He  will  go  on  ascending  as  long  as  he 
recites,  whether  reciting  slcnvly  or  quickly .n”*11 

Ibn  Majah  also  recorded  part  of  this  Hadith  from  Bishr  bin 
Al-Muhajir,12'  and  this  chain  of  narrators  is  Hasan,  according 
to  the  criteria  of  Imam  Muslim. 


A  part  of  this  Hadith  is  also  supported  by  other  Hadiths.  For 
instance,  Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Abu  Umamah  Al-Bahili 
said  that  he  heard  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  say, 


^  l g  >  IS*  j  I  i  i  ft  g  .IS  iftllill  ^  Lftgiij 

.  liftUiJl  L.gl*l  )jt.  jliuj  ffe 


“Read  the  Qur'an,  because  it  will  intercede  on  behalf  of  its 
people  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection .  Read  the  hoo  lights,  Al- 
Baqarah  and  Al  'Imran,  because  they  will  come  in  the  shape  of 
hvo  clouds,  hoo  shades  or  hoo  lines  of  birds  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection  and  will  argue  on  behalf  of  their  people  on  that 
Day.  a 


The  Prophet  jg  then  said, 


aRead  Al-Baqarah,  because  in  having  it  there  is  blessing,  and 
in  ignoring  there  is  a  sorrow  and  the  sorceresses  cannot 
memorize  ifV31 


111  Ahmad  5:352 
Ibn  Majah  2  :1242. 
131  Ahmad  5 :249 


100 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlm 


Also,  Imam  Muslim  narrated  this  Hadith  in  the  Book  of 
Prayer111 

Imam  Ahmad  narrated  that  An-Nawwas  bin  Sam ‘an  said 
that  the  Prophet  said, 


j*+*^®*  \jj\S  lli!  1  jl^jj L) 


«6i  M 


•On  the  Day  of  Resurrection  the  Qur'an  and  its  people  who 
used  to  implement  it  will  be  brought  forth,  preceded  by  Surat 
Al-Baqarah  and  Al  'Imran.* 


An-Nawwas  said,  “The  Prophet  jg  set  three  examples  for 
these  two  Siirahs  and  I  did  not  forget  these  examples  ever 
since.  He  si  said, 


jJ*  ije  j\  ijj-i  l  ■>  f.  ■ ;  jlilt  j(  Units’ll 

•  ^ jC.  ^ . _ s I j ■ 


“They  will  come  like  two  clouds,  two  dark  shades  or  two  lines 
of  birds  arguing  on  behalf  of  their  peopled 

It  was  also  recorded  in  Sahih  Muslim ,3'  and  At-Tirmidhi 
narrated  this  Hadith,  which  he  rendered  Hasan  Gharib .*4* 


Surat  Al-Baqarah  was  revealed  in  Al-Madinah 

There  is  no  disagreement  over  the  view  that  Surat  Al- 
Baqarah  was  revealed  in  its  entirety  in  Al-Mudlnah.  Moreover, 
Al-Baqarah  was  one  of  the  first  Surahs  to  be  revealed  in  Al- 
Madlnah,  while,  Allah’s  statement, 

4^1)1  jj,  4-i  Cy 

4And  be  afraid  of  the  Day  when  you  shall  be  brought  back  to 
Allah.)  (2:281) 

was  the  last  Ayah  to  be  revealed  from  the  Qur’an.  Also,  the 
Ayat  about  usury  were  among  the  last  Ayat  to  be  revealed. 
Khalid  bin  Ma'dan  used  to  call  Al-Baqarah  the  Fustat  (tent)  of 

111  Muslim  1 :553 
'2*  Ahmad  4 :183 
131  Muslim  1 :554. 

^  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8:191 


101 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Parti} 

the  Qur’an.  Some  of  the  scholars  said  that  it  contains  a 
thousand  news  incidents,  a  thousand  commands  and  a 
thousand  prohibitions.  Those  who  count  said  that  the  number 
of  Al-Baqarah’ s  Ayat  is  two  hundred  and  eighty-seven,  and  its 
words  are  six  thousand  two  hundred  and  twenty-one  words. 
Further,  its  letters  are  twenty-five  thousand  five  hundred. 
Allah  knows  best. 

Ibn  Jurayj  narrated  that  ‘Ata’  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 
“ Surat  Al-Baqarah  was  revealed  in  Al-Madlnah.”,1)  Also,  Khasif 
said  from  Mujahid  that  ‘Abdullah  bin  Az-Zubayr  said;  “ Surat 
Al-Baqarah  was  revealed  in  Al-Madlnah.”121  Several  Imams  and 
scholars  of  Tafsir  issued  similar  statements,  and  there  is  no 
difference  of  opinion  over  this  as  we  have  stated. 

The  Two  Sahihs  recorded  that  Ibn  Mas*Ud  kept  the  Ka'bah 
on  his  left  side  and  Mina  on  his  right  side  and  threw  seven 
pebbles  (at  the  Jamrah)  and  said,  “The  one  to  whom  Surat  Al- 
Baqarah  was  revealed  (i.e.  the  Prophet  jg)  performed  Rami  (the 
Hajj  rite  of  throwing  pebbles)  similarly.”  The  Two  Sahihs 
recorded  this  Hadith.^ 

Further,  Ibn  Marduwyah  reported  a  Hadith  of  Shu'bah  from 
‘Aqfl  bin  Talhah  from  TJtbah  bin  Marthad;  “The  Prophet  jg  saw 
that  his  Companions  were  not  in  the  first  lines  and  he  said, 

a  a '.ill  1  Qj  yl*  U® 

«0  Companions  of  Surat  Al-Baqarah .»  I  Think  that  this  incident 
occurred  during  the  battle  of  Hunayn  when  the  Companions 
retreated.  Then,  the  Prophet  jg  commanded  Al-‘Abbas  (his 
uncle)  to  yell  out, 

\  U» 

«0  Companions  of  the  tree!*  meaning  the  Companions  who 
participated  in  the  pledge  of  Ar- Rid  wan  (under  the  tree).  In 
another  narration,  Al-  ‘Abbas  cried,  “O  Companions  of  Surat 
Al-Baqarahl”  encouraging  them  to  come  back,  so  they  returned 
from  every  direction.  Also,  during  the  battle  of  Al-Yamamah, 
against  the  army  of  Musaylimah  the  Liar,  the  Companions 

***  Ad-Durr  Al-Manthur  1 :47. 

121  Ibid. 

131  Fath  Al-Bdri  3 :678 ,  Muslim  2 :942 . 


102 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

first  retreated  because  of  the  huge  number  of  soldiers  in 
Musaylimah’s  army.  The  Muhajirun  and  the  Ansar  called  out 
for  each  other,  saying;  “O  people  of  Surat  Al-Baqarah\”  Allah 
then  gave  them  victory  over  their  enemy,  may  Allah  be  pleased 
with  all  of  the  companions  of  all  the  Messengers  of  Allah J1' 

^0  P  * — ^ 

4?  v 1 

ilrt  the  Name  of  Allah,  the  Most  Gracious ,  the  Most  Merciful^ 

41.  Alif  Lam  M\m$. 

The  Discussion  of  the  Individual  Letters 

The  individual  letters  in  the  beginning  of  some  Surahs  are 
among  those  things  whose  knowledge  Allah  has  kept  only  for 
Himself.  This  was  reported  from  Abu  Bakr,  ‘Umar,  ‘Uthman, 
‘Ali  and  Ibn  Mas*ud.  It  was  said  that  these  letters  are  the 
names  of  some  of  the  Surahs .  It  was  also  said  that  they  are 
the  beginnings  that  Allah  chose  to  start  the  Surahs  of  the 
Qur'an  with.  Khaslf  stated  that  Mujahid  said,  “The  beginnings 
of  the  Surahs ,  such  as  Qaf  Sad,  Ta  Sin  Man  and  Alif  Lam  Ra , 
are  just  some  letters  of  the  alphabet.”  Some  linguists  also 
stated  that  they  are  letters  of  the  alphabet  and  that  Allah 
simply  did  not  cite  the  entire  alphabet  of  twenty-eight  letters. 
For  instance,  they  said,  one  might  say,  “My  son  recites  Alif 
Ba,  Ta ,  Tha ...  ”  he  means  the  entire  alphabet  although  he 
stops  before  mentioning  the  rest  of  it.  This  opinion  was 
mentioned  by  Ibn  Jarir.121 

The  Letters  at  the  Beginning  of  Surahs 

If  one  removes  the  repetitive  letters,  then  the  number  of  letters 
mentioned  at  the  beginning  of  the  Surahs  is  fourteen:  Alif,  Lam, 
Mun,  Sad,  Ra,  Kaf,  Ha,  Yd,  *Ayn,  Ta,  Sin,  Ha,  Qaf,  Nun. 

So  glorious  is  He  Who  made  everything  subtly  reflect  His 
wisdom. 

Moreover,  the  scholars  said,  “There  is  no  doubt  that  Allah 
did  not  reveal  these  letters  for  jest  and  play.”  Some  ignorant 


111  Al-Majma‘  6:180. 
121  At-Tabari  1 :208. 


203 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  ( Part-1 ) 

people  said  that  some  of  the  Qur’an  does  not  mean  anything, 
(meaning,  such  as  these  letters)  thus  committing  a  major 
mistake.  On  the  contrary,  these  letters  carry  a  specific 
meaning.  Further,  if  we  find  an  authentic  narration  leading  to 
the  Prophet  that  explains  these  letters,  we  will  embrace  the 
Prophet’s  statement.  Otherwise,  we  will  stop  where  we  were 
made  to  stop  and  will  proclaim, 

x*  &  £ 

i We  believe  in  it;  all  of  it  (clear  and  unclear  verses)  is  from  our 
Lord)  (3:7). 

The  scholars  did  not  agree  on  one  opinion  or  explanation 
regarding  this  subject.  Therefore,  whoever  thinks  that  one 
scholar’s  opinion  is  correct,  he  is  obliged  to  follow  it,  otherwise 
it  is  better  to  refrain  from  making  any  judgment  on  this 
matter.  Allah  knows  best. 

These  Letters  testify  to  the  Miraculous  Qur’an 

The  wisdom  behind  mentioning  these  letters  in  the  beginning 
of  the  Surahs ,  regardless  of  the  exact  meanings  of  these 
letters,  is  that  they  testify  to  the  miracle  of  the  Qur’an.  Indeed, 
the  servants  are  unable  to  produce  something  like  the  Qur’an, 
although  it  is  comprised  of  the  same  letters  with  which  they 
speak  to  each  other.  This  opinion  was  mentioned  by  Ar-Razi  in 
his  Tafsir  who  related  it  to  Al-Mubarrid  and  several  other 
scholars.  Al-Qurtubi  also  related  this  opinion  to  Al-Farra’  and 
Qutrub.  Az-Zamakhshari  agreed  with  this  opinion  in  his 
book,  Al-Kashshaf.  In  addition,  the  Imam  and  scholar  Abu  Al- 
‘Abbas  Ibn  Taymiyyah  and  our  Shaykh  Al-Hafiz  Abu  Al-Hajjaj 
Al-Mizzi  agreed  with  this  opinion.  Al-Mizzi  told  me  that  it  is 
also  the  opinion  of  Shaykh  Al-Islam  Ibn  Taymiyyah. 

Az-Zamakhshari  said  that  these  letters,  “Were  not  all 
mentioned  once  in  the  beginning  of  the  Qur’an.  Rather,  they 
were  repeated  so  that  the  challenge  (against  the  creation)  is 
more  daring.  Similarly,  several  stories  were  mentioned 
repeatedly  in  the  Qur’an,  and  also  the  challenge  was  repeated 
in  various  areas  (i.e.,  to  produce  something  like  the  Qur’an). 
Sometimes,  one  letter  at  a  time  was  mentioned,  such  as  Sad, 
JVun  and  Qaf  Sometimes  two  letters  were  mentioned,  such  as 


- Tafslr  Ibtt  Kathfr 

iHa  Man ^  (44:1)  Sometimes,  three  letters  were  mentioned, 
such  as, 

iAlif  Lam  Mim  (2 :l)i  and  four  letters,  such  as, 
i'AlifLdm  Matt  Ra}  (13:1),  and 


iAlif  Lam  Mini  Sad }  (7:1). 
Sometimes,  five  letters  were  mentioned,  such  as, 

iKaf  Ha  Yd  'Ayn  Sdd$  (19:1),  and; 


iHa  Mim.  ‘Ayn  Sin  Qafo  (42:1-2). 

This  is  because  the  words  that  are  used  in  speech  are 
usually  comprised  of  one,  two,  three,  four,  or  five  letters.” 

Every  Surah  that  begins  with  these  letters  demonstrates  the 
Qur’an’s  miracle  and  magnificence,  and  this  fact  is  known  by 
those  well-versed  in  such  matters.  The  count  of  these  Surahs 
is  twenty-nine.  For  instance,  Allah  said, 

i$-$  ^  iflTj 


iAlif  Lam  Mim$  This  is  the  Book  (the  Qur’an),  wherein 
there  is  no  doubt  (2:1-2), 


ilz  ssafess  us  z  'h  4  V  s& 


iAlif  Lam  Mim .  Allah!  Ld  ilaha  ilia  Huwa  (none  has  the  right 
to  be  worshipped  but  He),  Al-Hayyul-Qayyuum  (the  Ever 
Living,  the  One  Who  sustains  and  protects  all  that  exists).  It  is 
He  Who  has  sent  down  the  Book  (the  Qur'an)  to  you 
(Muhammad  with  truth,  confirming  what  came  before  it 
(3:1-3),  and, 


44  ££  4  ji.  *  Jb'i  j/i 

iAlif  Lam  Mim  Sad.  (This  is  the)  Book  (the  Qur'an)  sent  down 


105 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Part-1) 


unto  you  (O  Muhammad  $g),  so  let  not  your  breast  be  narrow 
therefrom }  (7:1-2). 


Also,  Allah  said, 

i+-&J  OiJji)'  J*  ^>-0'  4~“ 


iAlif  Lam  Ra.  (This  is)  a  Book  which  We  have  revealed  unto 
you  (0  Muhammad  m)  in  order  that  you  might  lead  mankind 
out  of  darkness  (of  disbelief  and  polytheism)  into  the  light  (of 
belief  in  the  Oneness  of  Allah  and  Islamic  Monotheism)  by  their 
Lord’s  leave }  (14:1), 


ily  ,>•  aj  *_»j  V  ' j  :fi'} 

iAlif  Lam  Mini.  The  revelation  of  the  Book  (this  Qur'an)  in 
lohich  there  is  no  doubt,  is  from  the  Lord  of  the  ‘Alamin 
( mankind ,  Jinn  and  all  that  exists)!}  (32:1-2), 


iHa  Mhn.  A  revelation  from  (Allah)  the  Most  Gracious,  the 
Most  Merciful }  (41:1-2),  and, 


i  |  :  jiSL'  S  «•  '$  JjS  zck  && 


iHa  Mhn.  'Ain  Sin  Qaf.  Likewise  Allah,  the  Almighty,  the 
Wise  sends  revelation  to  you  (O  Muhammad  sg)  as  (He  sent 
revelation  to)  those  before  you.}  (42:1-3). 


There  are  several  other  Ayat  that  testify  to  what  we  have 
mentioned  above,  and  Allah  knows  best. 


i2.  That  is  Book  in  which  there  is  no  Rayb,  guidance  for  the 
Muttaqin}. 


There  is  no  Doubt  in  the  Qur’an 

The  Book,  is  the  Qur’an,  and  Rayb  means  doubt.  As-Suddi 
said  that  Abu  Malik  and  Abu  Salih  narrated  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas, 
and  Murrah  Al-Hamadani  narrated  from  Ibn  Mas*ud  and 
several  other  Companions  of  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  that, 

f.  *  ^ 

in  ^ 

iln  which  there  is  no  Rayb},  means  about  which  there  is  no 


106 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kafhtr 

doubt.111  Abu  Ad-Darda’,  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Mujahid,  Said  bin 
Jubayr,  Abu  Malik,  Nafi‘  ‘Ata’,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin 
Anas,  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan,  As-Suddi,  Qatadah  and  Ismail  bin 
Abi  Khalid  said  similarly.  In  addition,  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  said,  “I  do 
not  know  of  any  disagreement  over  this  explanation.”121  The 
meaning  of  this  is  that  the  Book,  the  Qur’an,  is  without  a 
doubt  revealed  from  Allah.  Similarly,  Allah  said  in  Sdrat  As- 
Sajdah, 


*ri>  u? 


iAlif  Lam  Mfttt ).  The  revelation  of  the  Book  (this  Qur’an)  in 
which  there  is  no  doubt,  is  from  the  Lord  of  all  that  exists)- 
(32:1-2). 

Some  scholars  stated  that  this  Ayah  -  2:2  -  contains  a 
prohibition  meaning,  “Do  not  doubt  the  Qur’an.”  Furthermore, 
some  of  the  reciters  of  the  Qur’an  pause  upon  reading, 

iCp 


4 there  is  no  doubt}  and  they  then  continue; 

/■  /  p#  f  /■  *' 

4J5  ^ 

$in  which  there  is  guidance  far  the  Muttaqln  (the  pious  and  righteous 
persons )>.  However,  it  is  better  to  pause  at, 

iin  which  there  is  no  doubfy  because  in  this  case, 


iguidance}  becomes  an  attribute  of  the  Qur'an  and  carries  a 
better  meaning  than, 

iin  which  there  is  guidance 


Guidance  is  granted  to  Those  Who  have  Taqwa 

Hidayah  -  correct  guidance  -  is  only  granted  to  those  who 
have  Taqwa  -  fear  of  Allah.  Allah  said, 


111  At-Tabari  1  :228. 

^  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:31. 


107 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Parti} 


Ji  JJe- 


$Say:  It  is  for  those  who  believe,  a  guide  and  a  healing.  And  as 
for  those  who  disbelieve,  there  is  heaviness  (deafitess)  in  their 
ears,  and  it  (the  Qur'an)  is  blindness  for  them.  They  are  those 
zvho  are  called  from  a  place  far  away  (so  they  neither  listen  nor 
understand )}  (41:44),  and, 


^  ,  A.T . 'j l——*-  y*  \jt  iy 


4And  We  send  down  of  the  Qur'an  that  which  is  a  healing  and 
a  mercy  to  those  who  believe  (in  Islamic  Monotheism  and  act  on 
it),  and  it  increases  the  Zdlimtn  (wrongdoers)  in  nothing  but 
loss }  (17:82). 


This  is  a  sample  of  the  numerous  Ayat  indicating  that  the 
believers,  in  particular,  benefit  from  the  Qur’an.  That  is 
because  the  Qur’an  is  itself  a  form  of  guidance,  but  the 
guidance  in  it  is  only  granted  to  the  righteous,  just  as  Allah 
said, 


a fjj  iS.uy  (^"j3  j*  («^»V  -*»  0*13' 


$0  mankind!  There  has  come  to  you  a  good  advice  from  your 
Lord  (i.e.  the  Qur'an,  enjoining  all  that  is  good  and  forbidding 
all  that  is  evil),  and  a  healing  for  that  (disease  of  ignorance, 
doubt,  hypocrisy  and  differences)  which  is  in  your  breasts,  -  a 
guidance  and  a  mercy  (explaining  lawful  and  unlawfril  things) 
for  the  believers }  (10:57). 

Ibn  ‘Abbas  and  Ibn  Mas*ud  and  other  Companions  of  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 

i guidance  for  the  Muttaqin  (the  pious  and  righteous  persons}, 
means,  a  light  for  those  who  have  Taqwa. 


The  Meaning  of  Al-Muttaqin 

Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  about, 


108 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

i guidance  for  the  Muttaqin}  that  it  means,  “They  are  the 
believers  who  avoid  Shirk  with  Allah  and  who  work  in  His 
obedience.”  Ibn  ‘Abbas  also  said  that  Al-Muttaqm  means,  “Those 
who  fear  Allah’s  punishment,  which  would  result  if  they 
abandoned  the  true  guidance  that  they  recognize  and  know. 
They  also  hope  in  Allah's  mercy  by  believing  in  what  He 
revealed.”  Further,  Qatadah  said  that, 


iAl-Muttaqin},  are  those  whom  Allah  has  described  in  His 
statement; 


iWho  believe  in  the  Ghayb  and  perform  the  Salah }  (2:3), 

and  the  following  Ayat.  Ibn  Jarir  stated  that  the  Ayah  (2:2) 
includes  all  of  these  meanings  that  the  scholars  have 
mentioned,  and  this  is  the  correct  view.  Also,  At-Tirmidhi  and 
Ibn  Majah  narrated  that  ‘Atiyah  As-Sa‘di  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


'cr*^  ii  (A  ^  yi  j j£j  jl*JI  V® 


*The  servant  will  not  acquire  the  status  of  the  Muttaqin  until 
he  abandons  what  is  harmless  out  of  fear  of  falling  into  that 
which  is  harmful  At-Tirmidhi  then  said  “ Hasan 
Ghanb.” 


There  are  Two  Types  of  Hidayah  (Guidance) 

Huda  here  means  the  faith  that  resides  in  the  heart,  and 
only  Allah  is  able  to  create  it  in  the  heart  of  the  servants. 
Allah  said, 

4  Verily,  you  (O  Muhammad  jfe)  guide  not  whom  you  like} 
(28:56), 


iNot  upon  you  (Muhammad  jg)  is  their  guidance }  (2:272), 


m 


Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  7  :147,  and  Ibn  Majah  2 : 1409 . 


109 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Part-1) 


4$  *3  ii'  ^ 


4W7iowsom?r  Allah  sends  astray,  none  can  guide  him) 
(7:186),  and, 


/./  /*'  K  '  -  *rr  t «  ->  ^  ^ 

^  ^  O'? 


iHe  whom  Allah  guides,  he  is  the  rightly  guided;  but  he  whom 
He  sends  astray,  for  him  you  will  find  no  Walt  (guiding  friend) 
to  lead  him  (to  the  right  path))  (18:17). 

Huda.  also  means  to  explain  the  truth,  give  direction  and 
lead  to  it.  Allah,  the  Exalted,  said, 

>>?  Jl  3-$  && 


iAnd  verily,  you  (O  Multammad  jfe)  are  indeed  guiding 
(mankind)  to  the  straight  path  (i.e.  Allah’s  religion  of  Islamic 
Monotheism))  (42:52), 

jfy)  “xi  cJi 

iYou  are  only  a  wamer,  and  to  every  people  there  is  a  guide) 
(13:7),  and, 


its®  $  £&  li^lS  ip  &;) 


iAnd  as  for  Thamud,  We  showed  and  made  clear  to  them  the 
path  of  truth  (Islamic  Monotheism)  through  Our  Messenger 
(i.e.  showed  them  the  way  of  success),  but  they  preferred 
blindness  to  guidance)  (41:17). 

testifying  to  this  meaning. 

Also,  Allah  said, 


iAnd  shown  him  the  two  ways  (good  and  evil).)  (90:10) 

This  is  the  view  of  the  scholars  who  said  that  the  two  ways 
refer  to  the  paths  of  righteousness  and  evil,  which  is  also  the 
correct  explanation.  And  Allah  knows  best. 


Meaning  of  Taqwa 

The  root  meaning  of  Taqwa  is  to  avoid  what  one  dislikes.  It 
was  reported  that  “Umar  bin  Al-Khattab  asked  Ubayy  bin  Ka*b 
about  Taqwa.  Ubayy  said,  “Have  you  ever  walked  on  a  path 


no 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

that  has  thorns  on  it?”  Umar  said,  “Yes.”  Ubayy  said,  “What 
did  you  do  then?”  He  said,  “I  rolled  up  my  sleeves  and 
struggled.”  Ubayy  said,  “That  is  Taqwa.” 

43. Those  Who  have  faith  in  the  Ghayb}. 

The  Meaning  of  Iman 

Abu  Ja'far  Ar-Razi  said  that  Al-'Ala’  bin  Al-Musayyib  bin 
Raff  narrated  from  Abu  Ishaq  that  Abu  Al-Ahwas  said  that 
‘Abdullah  said,  “/man  is  to  trust.”.1'1  ‘Ali  bin  Abi  Talhah 
reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 

HU* 

iwho  have  faith}  means  they  trust.*21  Also,  Ma‘mar  said  that  A z- 
Zuhri  said,  “/man  is  the  deeds. ”*3*  In  addition,  Abu  Ja'far  Ar- 
Razi  said  that  Ar-RabT  bin  Anas  said  that,  They  have  faith’, 
means,  they  fear  (Allah).*4* 

Ibn  Janr  (At-Tabari)  commented,  “The  prefered  view  is  that 
they  be  described  as  having  faith  in  the  Unseen  by  the  tongue, 
deed  and  creed.  In  this  case,  fear  of  Allah  is  included  in  the 
general  meaning  of  /man,  which  necessitates  following  deeds  of 
the  tongue  by  implementation.  Hence,  /man  is  a  general  term 
that  includes  affirming  and  believing  in  Allah,  His  Books  and 
His  Messengers,  and  realizing  this  affirmation  through  adhering 
to  the  implications  of  what  the  tongue  utters  and  affirms.” 

Linguistically,  in  the  absolute  sense,  /man  merely  means 
trust,  and  it  is  used  to  mean  that  sometimes  in  the  Qur’an, 
for  instance,  Allah  the  Exalted  said, 

C/i&} 

4He  trusts  ( yu’minu )  in  Allah,  and  trusts  (yu’tninu)  in  the 
believers.}  (9:61) 

Prophet  Yusufs  brothers  said  to  their  father, 

*'*  At-Tabari  1 :235. 

*2'  Ibid. 

*3*  Ibid. 

*4*  Ibid. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Part-1) 


111 


"  IL^=»  Jlj  U 

4Buf  you  u>i//  neper  believe  us  even  when  we  speak  the  truth) 
(12:17). 

Further,  the  word  Imdn  is  sometimes  mentioned  along  with 
deeds,  such  as  Allah  said, 

4o }£»'»  lid' 


4Sai>e  f/jose  who  believe  (in  Islamic  Monotheism)  and  do 
righteous  deeds)  (95:6). 

However,  when  Imdn  is  used  in  an  unrestricted  manner,  it 
includes  beliefs,  deeds,  and  statements  of  the  tongue.1*1  We 
should  state  here  that  Imdn  increases  and  decreases. 

There  are  many  narrations  and  Hadiths  on  this  subject,  and 
we  discussed  them  in  the  beginning  of  our  explanation  of 
Sahih.  Al-Bukhari,  all  favors  are  from  Allah.  Some  scholars 
explained  that  Imdn  means  Khashyah  (fear  of  Allah).  For 
instance,  Allah  said; 

j[) 


4  Verily,  those  who  fear  their  Lord  unseen  (i.e.  they  do  not  see  Him, 
nor  His  punishment  in  the  Hereafter))  (67:12),  and, 


35  *3$  cgfi  &  & 


iWIto  feared  the  Most  Gracious  (Allalt)  in  the  Ghayb  (unseen) 
and  brought  a  heart  turned  in  repentance  (to  Him  and 
absolutely  free  from  every  kind  of  polytheism))  (50:33). 

Fear  is  the  core  of  Imdn  and  knowledge,  just  as  Allah  the 
Exalted  said, 

irt  ii'  (\) 


ilt  is  only  those  who  have  knowledge  among  His  servants  that 
fear  Allah)  (35:28). 


The  Meaning  of  Al-Ghayb 

As  for  the  meaning  of  Ghayb  here,  the  Salaf  have  different 
explanations  of  it,  all  of  which  are  correct,  indicating  the  same 

'*'  See  the  Tafsir  of  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :35 


112 


Tajsir  Ibn  Kathrr 

general  meaning.  For  instance,  Abu  Jafar  Ar-Razi  quoted  Ar- 
Rabl‘  bin  Anas,  reporting  from  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  about  Allah’s 
statement, 


i(Tho$e  ivho)  have  faith  in  the  Ghayb K 


“They  believe  in  Allah,  His  angels,  Books,  Messengers,  the  Last 
Day,  His  Paradise,  Fire  and  in  the  meeting  with  Him.  They 
also  believe  in  life  after  death  and  in  Resurrection.  All  of  this 
is  the  Ghayb.”  Qatadah  bin  Di‘amah  said  similarly.*1' 


Said  bin  Mansttr  reported  from  ‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Yazid 
who  said,  “We  were  sitting  with  ‘Abdullah  bin  MasUd  when  we 
mentioned  the  Companions  of  the  Prophet  ^  and  their  deeds 
being  superior  to  our  deeds.  ‘Abdullah  said,  The  matter  of 
Muhammad  was  clear  for  those  who  saw  him.  By  He  other 
than  Whom  there  is  no  God,  no  person  will  ever  acquire  a 
better  type  of  faith  than  believing  in  Al-Ghayb.’  He  then  recited, 


4AIif  Lam  Mim.  This  is  the  Book,  wherein  there  is  no  doubt,  a 
guidance  for  the  Muttaqm.  TIiose  who  believe  in  the  Ghayb} , 
until, 


0\} 

ithe  successful}  ”[2]  Ibn  Abi  Hatim,  Ibn  Marduwyah  and  Al- 
Hakim,  in  his  Mustadrak,[3]  recorded  this  Hadith.  Al-Hakim 
commented  that  this  Hadith  is  authentic  and  that  the  Two 
Shaykhs  -  Al-Bukhan  and  Muslim  -  did  not  collect  it,  although 
it  meets  their  criteria. 

Ahmad  recorded  a  Hadith  with  similar  meaning  from  Ibn 
Muhayriz  who  said:  I  said  to  Abu  Jumu'ah,  “Narrate  a  Hadith 
for  us  that  you  heard  from  the  Messenger  of  Allah.”  He  said, 
“Yes.  I  will  narrate  a  good  Hadith  for  you.  Once  we  had  lunch 
with  the  Messenger  of  Allah  Abu  TJbaydah,  who  was  with 
us,  said,  ‘O  Messenger  of  Allah!  Are  people  better  than  us?  We 
embraced  Islam  with  you  and  performed  Jihad  with  you.*  He  ^ 

111  At-Tabari  1 :236. 

^  Said  bin  Mansur  2  :544 . 

^  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :34  and  Al-Hakim  2  :260. 


113 


Surah  2.  At-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Part-1) 


said, 


r j  r5  —  ^ 


“Yes,  those  who  will  come  after  you,  who  will  believe  in  me 
although  they  did  not  see  me."”1 11 


This  Hadith  has  another  route  collected  by  Abu  Bakr  bin 
Marduwyah  in  his  Tafsir,  from  Salih  bin  Jubayr  who  said: 
‘Abu  Jumu'ah  Al-Ansari,  the  Companion  of  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  came  to  Bayt  Al-Maqdis  (Jerusalem)  to  perform  the 
prayer.  Raja’  bin  Haywah  was  with  us,  so  when  Abu  Jumu'ah 
finished,  we  went  out  to  greet  him.  When  he  was  about  to 
leave,  he  said,  “You  have  a  gift  and  a  right.  I  will  narrate  a 
Hadith  for  you  that  I  heard  from  the  Messenger  of  Allah.”  We 
said,  “Do  so,  and  may  Allah  grant  you  mercy.”  He  said,  “We 
were  with  the  Messenger  of  Allah,  ten  people  including  Mu‘adh 
bin  Jabal.  We  said,  "O  Messenger  of  Allah!  Are  there  people  who 
will  acquire  greater  rewards  than  us?  We  believed  in  Allah  and 
followed  you.’  He  jg  said, 


(■y  if:  !l  i/t  pS. «3d  jj--j j 

l  I  i  aj  LL  a,  j f  CjT.  ^  US'  ^ 


>y-> 


'‘What  prevents  you  from  doing  so,  while  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  is  among  you,  bringing  you  the  revelation  from  heaven? 
There  are  people  who  will  come  after  you  and  who  will  be  given 
a  book  between  two  covers  (the  Qur'an),  and  tltey  will  believe 
in  it  and  implement  its  commands.  They  have  a  greater  reivard 
than  you,  even  hoice  as  muc/i.*”*2' 


iAnd  perform  Saldh,  and  spend  out  of  what  we  have  provided 
for  them ^ 


Meaning  of  Iqamat  As-Salah 

Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that, 


111  Ahmad  4:106. 
l2'  Ibn  ‘Asakir  6:368. 


114 


Tg/sir  Ibn  Kathir 


iAnd  perform  the  Solidify,  means,  “Perform  the  prayer  with  all  of 
the  obligations  that  accompany  it.”*1*  Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn 
‘Abbas  said,  “ Iqamat  As-Salah  means  to  complete  the  bowings, 
prostrations,  recitation,  humbleness  and  attendance  for  the 
prayer.”*2*  Qatadah  said,  “Iqamat  As-Salah  means  to  preserve 
punctuality,  and  the  ablution,  bowings,  and  prostrations  of  the 
prayer.”*3’  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  said  Iqamat  As-Salah  means  "To 
preserve  punctuality  for  it,  as  well  as  completing  ones  purity  for 
it,  and  completing  the  bowings,  prostrations,  recitation  of  the 
Qur’an,  Tashahhud  and  blessings  for  the  Prophet  jg.  This  is 
Iqamat  As-Saldh.’w 

The  Meaning  of  “Spending**  in  this  Ayah 

‘Ali  bin  Abi  Talhah  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 


iAnd  spend  out  of  what  We  have  provided  for  them}  means,  “The 
Zakah  due  on  their  wealth.”*5*  As-Suddi  said  that  Abu  Malik 
and  Abu  Salih  narrated  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  as  well  as  Murrah 
from  Ibn  Mas^d  and  other  Companions  of  the  Messenger  of 


iAnd  spend  out  of  what  We  have  provided  Jbr  them }  means,  “A 
man’s  spending  on  his  family.  This  was  before  the  obligation  of 
Zakah  was  revealed.”*6’  Juwaybir  narrated  from  Ad-Dahhak, 
“General  spending  (in  charity)  was  a  means  of  drawing  nearer 
to  Allah,  according  to  one’s  discretion  and  capability.  Until  the 
obligation  of  charity  was  revealed  in  the  seven  Ayat  of  Surat 
Bara’ ah  (chapter  9),  were  revealed.  These  abrogated  the 
previous  case.”*7' 

***  At-Tabari  1 :241 . 

*2*  Ibid. 

■3|  Ibn  Abi  Hfitim  1 :37. 

*4*  Ibid. 

*5*  At-Tabari  1 :243 . 

*6*  Ibid. 

*7’  Ibid. 


115 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Part-1) 


In  many  instances,  Allah  mentioned  prayer  and  spending 
wealth  together.  Prayer  is  a  right  of  Allah  as  well  as  a  form  of 
worshipping  Him.  It  includes  singling  Him  out  for  one's 
devotion,  praising  Him,  glorifying  Him,  supplicating  to  Him, 
invoking  Him,  and  it  displays  one's  dependence  upon  Him. 
Spending  is  form  of  kindness  towards  creatures  by  giving  them 
what  will  benefit  them,  and  those  people  most  deserving  of 
this  charity  are  the  relatives,  the  wife,  the  servants  and  then 
the  rest  of  the  people.  So  all  types  of  required  charity  and 
required  spending  are  included  in  Allah's  saying, 


iAnd  spend  out  of  what  we  have  provided  for  them}.  The  Two 
Sahihs  recorded  that  Ibn  TJmar  said  that  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  said, 


.Ai  jjZ.j  iiu;  h\j  iui  v\  v  jS  ihi+i  JU  fXvJi  £ 

IcJJl  j  i  loiSyi  .iLlj 


u Islam  is  built  upon  five  (pillars):  Testifying  that  there  is  no 
deity  worthy  of  worship  except  Allah  and  that  Muhammad  is 
the  Messenger  of  Allah,  establishing  the  prayer,  giving  Zakdh, 
fasting  Ramadan  and  Hajj  to  the  House. t*1* 


There  are  many  other  Hadiths  on  this  subject. 


The  Meaning  of  Salah 


In  the  Arabic  language,  the  basic  meaing  of  Salah  is 
supplication.  In  religious  terminology,  Salah  is  used  to  refer  to 
the  acts  of  bowing  and  prostration,  the  remaining  specified 
acts  associated  with  it,  specificed  at  certain  times,  with  those 
known  conditions,  and  the  characteristics,  and  requirements 
that  are  well-known  about  it. 


44.  And  who  have  faith  in  what  is  revealed  to  you  and  in  what 
was  revealed  before  you,  and  in  the  Hereafter  they  are  certain.} 


Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that, 


4^2  ,> 


'  \  S’*'  s  \  -> 

Uj  4>i  & 


Fath  Al-Bari  1 :64  and  Muslim  1 :45. 


116 


Tafsir  Ibrt  Kathtr 


iAnd  who  have  faith  in  what  is  revealed  to  you  and  in  what  was 
revealed  before  you  means,  ‘They  believe  in  what  Allah  sent  you 
with,  and  in  what  the  previous  Messengers  were  sent  with,  they 
do  not  distinguish  between  (believing)  them,  nor  do  they  reject 
what  they  brought  from  their  Lord.”*11 


^And  in  the  Hereafter  they  are  certain ^  that  is  the  resurrection, 
the  standing  (on  the  Day  of  Resurrection),  Paradise,  the  Fire, 
the  reckoning  and  the  the  Scale  that  weighs  the  deeds  (the 
Afizan).121  The  Hereafter  is  so  named  because  it  comes  after  this 
earthly  life. 


Attributes  of  the  Believers 


The  people  described  here  (2:4)  are  those  whom  Allah 
described  in  the  preceding  Ayah, , 


iThose  who  have  faith  in  the  Gltayb  and  perform  Saldh,  and 
spend  out  of  what  we  have  provided  for  them.$ 


Mujahid  once  stated,  “Four  Ayat  at  the  beginning  of  Surat 
Al-Baqarah  describe  the  believers,  two  describe  the 
disbelievers,  and  thirteen  describe  the  hypocrites.”*3*  The  four 
Ayat  mentioned  in  this  statement  are  general  and  include 
every  believer,  whether  an  Arab,  non-Arab,  or  a  person  of  a 
previous  Scripture,  whether  they  are  Jiruis  or  humans.  All  of 
these  attributes  complement  each  other  and  require  the 
existence  of  the  other  attributes.  For  instance,  it  is  not 
possible  that  one  believes  in  the  Unseen,  performs  the  prayer 
and  gives  Zakdh  without  believing  in  what  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  and  the  previous  Messengers  were  sent  with.  The  same 
with  certainty  in  the  Hereafter,  this  is  not  correct  without  that, 
for  Allah  has  commanded  the  believers, 


rp: 


K  & 


1,1  At-Jabari  1 :244. 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :39. 
131  At-Tabari  1 :239. 


117 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24}  (Parti} 


40  you  who  believe!  Believe  in  Allah,  and  His  Messenger,  and 
the  Book  (the  Qur'an)  which  He  has  revealed  to  the  Messenger, 
and  the  Book  which  He  sent  own  to  those  before  (him)} 
(4:136), 


c#it  Sir  V)  Jil  \)Xc  % 

nil 


<  > 


argue  not  with  the  People  of  the  Book,  unless  it  be  in  (a 
way)  that  is  better,  except  with  such  of  them  as  do  wrong  ;  and 
say  (to  them):  "We  believe  in  that  which  has  been  revealed  to 
us  and  revealed  to  you ;  our  Ilah  (Cod)  and  your  Uah  (God)  is 
One  (i.e.  Allah)’}  (29:46), 


a  8*  £  y( 


40  you  who  have  been  given  the  Book  (Jews  and  Christians)! 
Believe  in  what  We  have  revealed  (to  Muhammad  ig) 
confirming  what  is  (already)  with  you}  (4:47),  and, 


i  '■M  J— tlsr"  &  f—S  Jits 


4Say  (O  Muhammad  $&) :  "0  People  of  the  Book  (Jews  and 
Christians)!  You  have  nothing  until  you  act  according  to  the 
Tawrah  (Torah),  the  Injil  (Gospel),  and  what  has  (now)  beat 
revealed  to  you  from  your  Lord  (the  Qur’an)."}  (5:68). 


Also,  Allah  the  Exalted  described  the  believers; 


‘aU-j  o* 


iThe  Messenger  (Muhammad  $&)  believes  in  what  has  been 
revealed  to  him  from  his  Lord ,  and  (so  do)  the  believers.  Each 
one  believes  in  Allah ,  His  Angels ,  His  Books,  and  His 
Messengers.  (They  say,)  "We  make  no  distinction  between  any 
of  His  Messengers' >  (2:285),  and, 


4And  those  wlw  believe  in  Allah  and  His  Messengers  and  make 
no  distinction  between  any  of  them  (Messengers)}  (4:152), 


118 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathir 


This  is  a  sample  of  the  Ayat  that  indicate  that  the  true 
believers  all  believe  in  Allah,  His  Messengers  and  His  Books. 

The  faithful  among  the  People  of  the  Book,  have  a  special 
significance  here,  since  they  believe  in  their  Books  and  in  all 
of  the  details  related  to  that,  so  when  such  people  embrace 
Islam  and  sincerely  believe  in  the  details  of  the  religion,  then 
they  will  get  two  rewards.  As  for  the  others,  they  can  only 
believe  in  the  previous’  religious  teachings  in  a  general  way. 
For  instance,  the  Prophet  stated, 


wliSJl  Jit  lip 

yOi  j/ 3  0i 


<iWhen  the  People  of  the  Book  narrate  to  you,  neither  reject  nor 
affirm  what  they  say.  Rather,  say,  We  believe  in  zohat  was 
revealed  to  us  and  what  was  revealed  to  you.'*1*1 


However,  the  faith  that  many  Arabs  have  in  the  religion  of 
Islam  as  it  was  revealed  to  Muhammad  might  be  more 
complete,  encompassing  and  firmer  than  the  faith  of  the  People 
of  the  Book  who  embraced  Islam.  Therefore,  if  the  believers  in 
Islam  among  the  People  of  the  Book  gain  two  rewards,  other 
Muslims  who  have  firmer  Islamic  faith  might  gain  an  equal 
reward  that  compares  to  the  two  the  People  of  the  Book  gain 
(upon  embracing  Islam).  And  Allah  knows  best. 


i5.  Tltey  are  on  guidance  from  their  Lord,  and  they  are  the 
successfid.} 


Guidance  and  Success  are  awarded  to  the  Believers 

Allah  said, 

iThey  are$  refers  to  those  who  believe  in  the  Unseen,  establish 
the  prayer,  spend  from  what  Allah  has  granted  them,  believe  in 
what  Allah  has  revealed  to  the  Messenger  and  the  Messengers 
before  him,  believe  in  the  Hereafter  with  certainty,  and  prepare 
the  necessary  requirements  for  the  Hereafter  by  performing 


111  Abu  DSwud  4:59. 


119 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  [ Portal ) 


good  deeds  and 
avoiding  the 
prohibitions.  Allah 
then  said, 

^On  guidance) 

meaning,  they  are 
(following)  a  light, 
guidance,  and  have 
insight  from  Allah, 

iAtid  they  are  the 
successfid)  meaning, 
in  this  world  and  the 
Hereafter.  They  shall 
have  what  they  seek 
and  be  saved  from  the 
evil  that  they  tried  to 
avoid.  Therefore,  they 
will  have  rewards, 
eternal  life  in 
Paradise,  and  safety 
from  the  torment  that 
Allah  has  prepared  for 


^ 

1 ii\j  $  0 

0^4  « »2 pji 4 


His  enemies. 


4*4^o>^si  ^  ^  ^  ?P  tpr 

46.  Verily,  those  who  disbelieve,  it  is  the  same  to  them  whether 
you  warn  them  or  do  not  warn  them,  they  will  not  believe. $ 
Allah  said, 

4» 


4  Verily,  those  who  disbelieve}  meaning,  covered  the  truth  and  hid 
it.  Since  Allah  has  written  that  they  would  do  so,  it  does  not 
matter  if  you  (O  Muhammad  sg)  warn  them  or  not,  they  would 
still  have  disbelieved  in  what  you  were  sent  with.  Similarly, 
Allah  said, 


120 


Tafsir  lbn  Kathir 


iTruly,  those  against  whom  the  Word  (wrath)  of  your  Lord  has 
been  justified,  will  not  believe.  Even  if  every  sign  should  come 
to  them,  until  they  see  the  painful  torment >  (10:96-97). 


About  the  rebellious  People  of  the  Book,  Allah  said, 


U  Ijyl  Slit 


iAnd  even  if  you  were  to  bring  to  the  People  of  the  Book  (Jews 
and  Christians)  all  the  Aydt,  they  would  not  follow  your  Qiblah 
(prayer  direction)}  (2:5). 

These  Aydt  indicate  that  whomever  Allah  has  written  to  be 
miserable,  they  shall  never  find  anyone  to  guide  them  to 
happiness,  and  whomever  Allah  directs  to  misguidance,  he 
shall  never  find  anyone  to  guide  him.  So  do  not  pity  them  -  O 
Muhammad  -  deliver  the  Message  to  them.  Certainly, 
whoever  among  them  accepts  the  Message,  then  he  shall  gain 
the  best  rewards.  As  for  those  who  turn  away  in  rejection,  do 
not  feel  sad  for  them  or  concerned  about  them,  for 

git  J& 


iYour  duty  is  only  to  convey  (the  Message)  and  on  Us  is  the 
reckoning }  (13:40),  and, 


^ 


iBut  you  are  only  a  wamer.  And  Allah  is  a  Wakil  (Disposer  of 
affairs,  Trustee,  Guardian)  over  all  things}  (11:12). 

‘Ali  bin  Abi  Talhah  reported  that  lbn  ‘Abbas  said  about 
Allah’s  statement, 


.  (  \> 
MX* 


.t 


iVerily,  those  who  disbelieve,  it  is  the  same  to  them  whether 
you  (O  Muhammad  warn  than  or  do  not  warn  them,  they 
will  not  believe} 

“That  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  was  eager  for  all  the  people  to 
believe  and  follow  the  guidance  he  was  sent  with.  Allah 
informed  him  that  none  would  believe  except  for  those  whom 
He  decreed  happiness  for  in  the  first  place,  and  none  would 
stray  except  those  who  Allah  has  decreed  to  do  so  in  the  first 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Part-1) 


121 


place. 


4 4>'J*  (I-Jj  d*J  rfs*-*  $  lit  ^J.} 


47.  Allah  has  set  a  seal  on  their  hearts  and  on  their  hearing, 
and  on  their  eyes  there  is  a  covering.  Theirs  will  be  a  great 
torment}. 


Meaning  of  Khatama 

As-Suddi  said  that, 

4iii 

iKltatama  Allah }  means,  “Allah  has  sealed.”121  Qatadah  said 
that  this  Ayah  means,  “Shaytan  controlled  them  when  they 
obeyed  him.  Therefore,  Allah  sealed  their  hearts,  hearing  and 
sight,  and  they  could  neither  see  the  guidance  nor  hear, 
comprehend  or  understand.”131  Ibn  Jurayj  said  that  Mujahid 
said, 

4 Allah  has  set  a  seal  on  their  hearts},  “A  stamp.  It  occurs  when  sin 
resides  in  the  heart  and  surrounds  it  from  all  sides,  and  this 
submersion  of  the  heart  in  sin  constitutes  a  stamp,  meaning  a 
seal.”141  Ibn  Jurayj  also  said  that  the  seal  is  placed  on  the 
heart  and  the  hearing. ,s>  In  addition,  Ibn  Jurayj  said,  that 
‘Abdullah  bin  Kathir  narrated  that  Mujahid  said,  “The  stain  is 
not  as  bad  as  the  stamp,  the  stamp  is  not  as  bad  as  the  lock 
which  is  the  worst  type.”161  Al-A‘mash  said,  “Mujahid 
demonstrated  with  his  hand  while  saying,  They  used  to  say 
that  the  heart  is  just  like  this  -  meaning  the  open  palm.  When 
the  servant  commits  a  sin,  a  part  of  the  heart  will  be  rolled  up  - 
and  he  rolled  up  his  index  finger.  When  the  servant  commits 
another  sin,  a  part  of  the  heart  will  be  rolled  up’  -  and  he  rolled 
up  another  finger,  until  he  rolled  up  all  of  his  fingers.  Then  he 

111  At-Jabari  1 :252. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :44 . 

131  Ibid. 

141  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :44 . 

151  At-Tabari  1  :259. 

161  Ibid. 


123 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Parti} 


authentic  Hadith  from  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jjg  stated.  Abu 
Hurayrah  narrated  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


:  JU;  Jt;  ^jJl  ii^Ji  Jijii  *Saj  ^5  oil;  Sij  ‘j\j  & ; 

^  d*  'A  J: 


aVWien  the  believer  commits  a  sin,  a  black  dot  will  be  engraved 
on  his  heart.  If  he  repents,  refrains  and  regrets,  his  heart  zoill 
be  polished  again.  If  he  commits  more  errors,  the  dots  will 
increase  until  they  cover  his  heart.  This  is  the  Ran  (stain)  that 
Allah  described. 


4  -  f  iy?  li  ftfjS  d*  S'j  j;  $£} 


iNay!  But  on  their  hearts  is  the  Ran  (stain)  which  they  used  to 
earn}”  (83:14). 

At-Tirmidhi,  An-Nasa’i  and  Ibn  Majah  recorded  this  Hadith, 
and  At-Tirmidhi  said  that  it  is  Hasan  Sahib.1 11 


The  Meaning  of  Ghishawah 

Reciting  the  Ayah, 

i Allah  has  set  a  seal  on  their  hearts  and  on  their  hearing },  then 
pausing,  then  continuing  with, 

iAnd  on  their  eyes  there  is  a  Ghishawah  (covering)}  is  accurate,  for 
the  stamp  is  placed  on  the  heart  and  the  hearing  while  the 
Ghishawah,  the  covering,  is  appropriately  placed  on  the  eyes. 
In  his  Tafsir,  As-Suddi  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  and  Ibn  Mas*ud 
said  about  Allah’s  statement, 

X .  *.£  pit  v 

T(»4**—  d®j  d f-  «»' 

iAIIdh  has  set  a  seal  on  their  hearts  and  on  their  hearing}, 

“So  that  they  neither  understand  nor  hear.  Allah  also  said  that 
He  placed  a  covering  on  their  sight,  meaning  eyes,  and  so, 

111  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  9:254,  An-Nasa’i  in  Al-Kubra  6:509,  and  Ibn 
Majah  2 :1418. 


124 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathtr 


they  do  not  see.”*1* 


The  Hypocrites 


We  mentioned  that  four  Ayat  in  the  beginning  of  Surat  Al- 
Baqarah  described  the  believers.  The  two  last  Ayat  (2:6-7) 
describe  the  disbelievers.  Afterwards,  Allah  begins  to  describe 
the  hypocrites  who  show  belief  and  hide  disbelief.  Since  the 
matter  of  the  hypocrites  is  vague  and  many  people  do  not 
realize  their  true  reality,  Allah  mentioned  their  description  in 
detail.  Each  of  the  characteristics  that  Allah  used  to  described 
them  with  is  a  type  of  hypocrisy  itself.  Allah  revealed  Surat 
Bard’ah  (chapter  9)  and  Surat  Al-Mundfiqun  (chapter  63)  about 
the  hypocrites.  He  also  mentioned  the  hypocrites  in  Surat  An- 
Nur  (24)  and  other  Surahs ,  so  that  their  description  would  be 
known  and  their  ways  and  errors  could  be  avoided.  Allah  said, 


aMj  J>aj  iy*  jyf 


^  Uj  ^  ^  \jtJ  I 


48.  And  of  mankind,  there  are  some  who  say:  "We  believe  in 
Allah  and  the  Last  Day "  while  in  fact  they  do  not  believe}. 

49.  They  try  to  deceive  Allah  and  those  who  believe ,  while  they 
only  deceive  themselves,  and  perceive  (it)  not!} 


Meaning  of  Nifdq 

Nifdq  means  to  show  conformity  -  or  agreement  -  and  to 
conceal  evil.  Nifdq  has  several  types:  Nifdq  in  the  creed  that 
causes  its  people  to  reside  in  Hell  for  eternity,  and  Nifdq  in 
deed,  which  is  one  of  the  major  sins,  as  we  will  explain  soon, 
Allah  willing.  Ibn  Jurayj  said  of  the  hypocrite  that,  aHis  actual 
deeds  are  different  from  what  he  publicizes,  what  he  conceals 
is  different  from  what  he  utters,  his  entrance  and  presence  are 
not  the  same  as  his  exit  and  absence.”*21 


The  Beginning  of  Hypocrisy 

The  revelations  about  the  characteristics  of  the  hypocrites 
were  revealed  in  Al-Madlnah,  this  is  because  there  were  no 

l1*  At-Tabari  1 :266. 

121  At-Tabari  1 :270. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (1  -  24)  (Part-1) 


125 


hypocrites  in  Makkah.  Rather  the  opposite  was  the  situation 
in  Makkah,  since  some  people  were  forced  to  pretend  that  they 
were  disbelievers,  while  their  hearts  concealed  their  faith. 
Afterwards,  the  Messenger  of  Allah  migrated  to  Al-Madinah, 
where  the  Ansar  from  the  tribes  of  Aws  and  Khazraj  resided. 
They  used  to  worship  idols  during  the  pre-Islamic  period  of 
ignorance,  just  as  the  rest  of  the  Arab  idolators.  Three  Jewish 
tribes  resided  in  Al-Madinah,  Banu  Qaynuqa'-allies  of  Al- 
Khazraj,  Banu  An-Nadir  and  Banu  Qurayzah-allies  of  the  Aws. 
Many  members  of  the  Aws  and  Khazraj  tribes  embraced  Islam. 
However,  only  a  few  Jews  embraced  Islam,  such  as  ‘Abdullah 
bin  Salam.  During  the  early  stage  in  Al-Madinah,  there  weren’t 
any  hypocrites  because  the  Muslims  were  not  strong  enough  to 
be  feared  yet.  On  the  contrary,  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg 
conducted  peace  treaties  with  the  Jews  and  several  other  Arab 
tribes  around  Al-Madinah.  Soon  after,  the  battle  of  Badr 
occurred  and  Allah  gave  victory  to  Islam  and  its  people. 
‘Abdullah  bin  Ubayy  bin  Salul  was  a  leader  in  Al-Madinah.  He 
was  Al-Khazraj’s  chief,  and  during  the  period  of  Jahiliyyah  he 
was  the  master  of  both  tribes  -  Aws  and  Khazraj.  They  were 
about  to  appoint  him  their  king  when  the  Message  reached  Al- 
Madinah,  and  many  in  Al-Madinah  embraced  Islam.  Ibn  Salul’s 
heart  was  filled  with  hatred  against  Islam  and  its  people.  When 
the  battle  of  Badr  took  place,  he  said,  “Allah’s  religion  has 
become  apparent.”  So  he  pretended  to  be  Muslim,  along  with 
many  of  those  who  were  just  like  him,  as  well  as  many  among 
the  People  of  the  Book.  It  was  then  that  hypocrisy  began  in  Al- 
Madinah  and  among  the  surrounding  nomad  tribes.  As  for  the 
Emigrants,  none  of  them  were  hypocrites,  since  they  emigrated 
willingly  (seeking  the  pleasure  of  Allah).  Rather,  when  a  Muslim 
would  emigrate  from  Makkah,  he  would  be  forced  to  abandon 
all  of  his  wealth,  offspring  and  land;  he  would  do  so  seeking 
Allah’s  reward  in  the  Hereafter. 


The  Tafsir  of  Ayah  2:8 

Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  narrated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that. 


iAttd  of  mankind,  there  are  some  who  say:  “We  believe  in 
Allah  and  the  Last  Day "  while  in  fact  they  do  not  believe  ^ 


126 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 


“This  refers  to  the  hypocrites  among  the  Aws  and  Khazraj  and 
those  who  behaved  as  they  did.”1'1 

This  is  how  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah  and  As- 
Suddi  explained  this  Ayah.  Allah  revealed  the  characteristics 
of  the  hypocrites,  so  that  the  believers  would  not  be  deceived 
by  their  outer  appearance,  thus  saving  the  believers  from  a 
great  evil.  Otherwise,  the  believers  might  think  that  the 
hypocrites  were  believers,  when  in  reality  they  are  disbelievers. 
To  consider  the  sinners  as  righteous  people  is  extremely 
dangerous,  Allah  said, 


iAnd  of  mankind,  there  are  some  who  say :  "We  believe  in  Allah  and 
the  Last  Day"  while  in  fact  they  do  not  believe )►  meaning,  they  utter 
these  false  statements  only  with  their  tongues,  just  as  Allah 
said, 


4  %  $  SJ3  4  &&X  Mi 


iWhen  the  hypocrites  come  to  you  (O  Muhammad  sg),  they 
say:  "We  bear  witness  that  you  are  indeed  the  Messenger  of 
Allah."  Allah  knows  that  you  are  indeed  His  Messenger $ 
(63:1). 

This  Ayah  means  that  the  hypocrites  utter  these  statements 
only  when  they  meet  you,  not  because  they  actually  believe 
what  they  are  saying.  The  hypocrites  emphasize  their  belief  in 
Allah  and  the  Last  Day  with  their  words,  when  that  is  not  the 
case  in  reality.  Therefore,  Allah  stated  that  the  hypocrites  lie  in 
their  testimony  of  creed,  when  He  said, 

itip  *#£3\  61 


iAnd  Allah  bears  witness  that  the  hypocrites  are  indeed  liars. $ 
(63:1),  and, 

iwhile  in  fact  they  believe  not  i 

Allah  said, 

m 


At -Tabari  1 :269 . 


iThey  try  to  deceive  Allah  and  those  who  believe }.  The  hypocrites 
show  belief  outwardly  while  concealing  disbelief.  They  think 
that  by  doing  this,  they  will  mislead  Allah,  or  that  the 
statements  they  utter  will  help  them  with  Allah,  and  this  is  an 
indication  of  their  total  ignorance.  They  think  that  such 
behavior  will  deceive  Allah,  just  as  it  might  deceive  some  of  the 
believers.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


P  Pi  ^  £  #  &  33  il  i  SAtf  >4 


%s  ^  jit 


iOn  the  Day  when  Allah  will  resurrect  them  all  together;  then 
they  will  swear  to  Him  as  they  swear  to  you.  And  they  think 
that  they  have  something  (to  stand  upon).  Verily,  they  are 
liars!}  (58:18). 

Hence,  Allah  refuted  their  way  by  saying, 


iWhile  they  only  deceive  themselves,  and  perceive  (it)  not!}  Allah 
stated  that  the  hypocrites  only  deceive  themselves  by  this 
behavior,  although  they  are  unaware  of  this  fact.  Allah  also 
said, 


iVerily,  the  hypocrites  try  to  deceive  Allah,  but  it  is  He  Who 
deceives  them}  (4:142). 

Also,  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  narrated  that  Ibn  Jurayj  commented  on 
Allah’s  statement, 


iVerily,  the  hypocrites  seek  to  deceive  Allah,  but  it  is  He  Who 
deceives  them}, 

“The  hypocrites  pronounce.  There  is  no  deity  worthy  of 
worship  except  Allah’  seeking  to  ensure  the  sanctity  of  their 
blood  and  money,  all  the  while  concealing  disbelief.”1 11  Said 
said  that  Qatadah  said, 


gwif)  <3»(  (**  l*j  yl'  \S»\i  jji  £  jij} 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :46. 


128 


Tafsir  lbn  Kathir 


4And  of  mankind,  there  are  some  who  say:  "\Ne  believe  in 
Allah  and  the  Last  Day "  while  in  fact  they  believe  not.  They 
try  to  deceive  Allah  and  those  who  believe,  while  they  only 
deceive  themselves,  and  perceive  (it)  not!  } 

“This  is  the  description  of  a  hypocrite.  He  is  devious,  he  says 
the  truth  with  his  tongue  and  defies  it  with  his  heart  and 
deeds.  He  wakes  up  in  a  condition  other  than  the  one  he  goes 
to  sleep  in,  and  goes  to  sleep  in  a  different  condition  than  the 
one  he  wakes  up  in.  He  changes  his  mind  just  like  a  ship  that 
moves  about  whenever  a  wind  blows.”1'1 


4  ’J-A  v'j*  Jv 


410.  In  their  hearts  is  a  disease  and  Allah  has  increased  their 
disease.  A  painful  torment  is  theirs  because  they  used  to  tell 
lies.} 


The  Meaning  of  'Disease’  in  this  Ayah 

As-Suddi  narrated  from  Abu  Malik  and  (also)  from  Abu 
Salih,  from  lbn  ‘Abbas,  and  (also)  Murrah  Al-Hamdani  from 
lbn  Mas*ud  and  other  Companions  that  this  Ayah, 

4In  their  hearts  is  a  disease}  means,  ‘doubt’,  and, 

4 And  Allah  has  increased  their  disease}  also  means  ‘doubt’.121 
Mujahid,  ‘Ikrimah,  Al-Hasan  Al-Basri,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Ar-Rabl‘ 
bin  Anas  and  Qatadah  also  said  similarly.  1,1  ‘Abdur-Rahman 
bin  Zayd  bin  Aslam  commented  on, 

iln  their  hearts  is  a  disease “A  disease  in  the  religion,  not  a 
physical  disease.  They  are  the  hypocrites  and  the  disease  is  the 

111  lbn  AbiHatim  1:47. 

(2)  Af-Tabari  1 :280 
^  lbn  Abi  Hatim  1 :48 . 


129 


Surah  2.  AhBagarah  (1  -  24)  (Portal) 


doubt  that  they  brought  to  Islam. 


Allah  has  increased  their  disease ^  meaning,  increased  them 
in  shameful  behavior.”1 11  He  also  recited, 


+*$  a  Q;  :|:^2  ^ 


d< 


{As  for  those  who  believe,  it  has  increased  their  faith,  and  they 
rejoice.  But  as  for  those  in  whose  hearts  is  a  disease,  it  will  add 
disgrace  to  their  disgrace. $  (9:124-125) 

and  commented,  “Evil  to  their  evil  and  deviation  to  their 
deviation.”  This  statement  by  ‘Abdur- Rahman  is  true,  and  it 
constitutes  a  punishment  that  is  compatible  to  the  sin,  just  as 
the  earlier  scholars  stated.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


)S2S  4$)^ 


{While  as  for  those  ivho  accept  guidance.  He  increases  their 
guidance  and  grants  them  their  piety }  (47:17). 

Allah  said  next, 


{Because  they  used  to  tell  lies}.  The  hypocrites  have  two 
characteristics,  they  lie  and  they  deny  the  Unseen. 

The  scholars  who  stated  that  the  Prophet  sg  knew  the 
hypocrites  of  his  time  have  only  the  Hadith  of  Hudhayfah  bin 
Al-Yaman  as  evidence.  In  it  the  Prophet  gave  him  the  names 
of  fourteen  hypocrites  during  the  battle  of  Tabuk.  These 
hypocrites  plotted  to  assassinate  the  Prophet  jjg  during  the 
night  on  a  hill  in  that  area.  They  planned  to  excite  the 
Prophet’s  camel,  so  that  she  would  throw  him  down  the  hill. 
Allah  informed  the  Prophet  jfe  about  their  plot,  and  the  Prophet 
told  Hudhayfah  their  names. 

As  for  the  other  hypocrites,  Allah  said  about  them, 


3&S  -5  £  !A?  k£t  yj>Vf  <<>:  j3£ 


IM 


At-Tabari  1  :280. 


130 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katltir 


iAnd  among  the  bedouins  around  you,  some  are  hypocrites, 
and  so  are  some  among  the  people  of  Al-Madinuh  who  persist  in 
hypocrisy;  you  (O  Muhammad  sg)  know  them  not.  We  know 
them}  (9:101),  and, 


}If  tlte  hypocrites,  and  those  in  whose  hearts  is  a  disease,  and 
those  who  spread  false  news  among  the  people  in  Al-Madinah 
do  not  cease,  We  shall  certainly  let  you  overpower  than,  that 
they  will  not  be  able  to  stay  in  it  as  your  neighbors  but  a  little 
while.  Accursed,  thaj  shall  be  seized  ivherever  found,  and  killed 
with  a  (terrible)  slaughter}  (33:60-61). 


These  Ayat  prove  that  the  Prophet  jg  was  not  informed  about 
each  and  everyone  among  the  hypocrites  of  his  time.  Rather, 
the  Prophet  jg  was  only  informed  about  their  characteristics, 
and  he  used  to  assume  that  some  people  possessed  these 
characteristics.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


&  ^  4  && 


as  ■)?, 


iHad  We  willed.  We  could  have  shown  them  to  you,  and  you 
should  have  known  them  by  their  marks;  but  surely,  you  will 
know  them  by  the  tone  of  their  speech!}  (47:30). 


The  most  notorious  hypocrite  at  that  time  was  ‘Abdullah  bin 
Ubayy  bin  Salul;  Zayd  bin  Arqam  -  the  Companion  -  gave 
truthful  testimony  to  that  effect.  In  addition,  ‘Umar  bin  Al- 
Khattab  once  mentioned  the  matter  of  Ibn  Salul  to  the  Prophet 
who  said, 


«J  would  not  like  the  Arabs  to  say  to  each  other  that 
Mulmnmad  jjg  is  killing  his  Companions .»*** 

Yet,  when  Ibn  Salul  died,  the  Prophet  performed  the 
funeral  prayer  for  him  and  attended  his  funeral  just  as  he  used 
to  do  with  other  Muslims.  It  was  recorded  in  the  Sahih  that  the 
Prophet  sfe  said, 


Al-Bukhari  4905,  Muslim  2584. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Portal) 


131 


yj-  u 


«J  u^s  givett  the  choice  (to  pray  for  him  or  ttot),  so  I  chose.  » 


In  another  narration,  the  Prophet  sg|  said, 


«  >  •  \  '  •  s 1 1  r-  f  •.  !(  *  r.f 

^  y  ^  ^  y D 


«//  /  knew  that  by  asking  (Allah  to  forgive  Ibn  Saliil)  more  than 
seventy  times  tlmt  He  would  forgive  him,  then  I  zvould  do 
that.^ 


411.  And  when  it  is  said  to  them:  "Do  not  make  mischief  on 
the  earth,"  they  say:  "We  are  only  peacemakers."} 

$12.  Verily,  they  are  the  ones  who  make  mischief,  but  they 
perceive  not.} 


Meaning  of  Mischief 

In  his  Tafsir,  As-Suddi  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  and  Ibn  Mas*ud 
commented, 


4 And  when  it  is  said  to  them :  "Do  not  make  mischief  on  the 
earth,"  they  say:  "We  are  only  peacemakers."} 

"They  are  the  hypocrites.  As  for, 

^'(4^  1} 


4"Do  not  make  mischief  on  tlte  earth"},  that  is  disbelief  and  acts 
of  disobedience.  Abu  JaTar  said  that  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  said 
that  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  said  that  Allah’s  statement, 

4c#Vt  4  ijiJi  V  $  Si 

4And  when  it  is  said  to  them:  "Do  not  make  mischief  on  the 
earth,"},  means,  “Do  not  commit  acts  of  disobedience  on  the 
earth.  Their  mischief  is  disobeying  Allah,  because  whoever 


111  FathAl-Bari  8:184,  Muslim  4 :2 141 . 
121  At-Tabari  1 :288. 


132 


Tgfsir  Ibtt  Kathir 

disobeys  Allah  on  the  earth,  or  commands  that  Allah  be 
disobeyed,  he  has  committed  mischief  on  the  earth.  Peace  on 
both  the  earth  and  in  the  heavens  is  ensured  (and  earned) 
through  obedience  (to  Allah).”'11  Ar-Rabi‘  bin  Anas  and 
Qatadah  said  similarly.'2' 


Types  of  Mischief  that  the  Hypocrites  commit 

Ibn  Jarir  said,  “The  hypocrites  commit  mischief  on  earth  by 
disobeying  their  Lord  on  it  and  continuing  in  the  prohibited 
acts.  They  also  abandon  what  Allah  made  obligatory  and 
doubt  His  religion,  even  though  He  does  not  accept  a  deed 
from  anyone  except  with  faith  in  His  religion  and  certainty  of 
its  truth.  The  hypocrites  also  lie  to  the  believers  by  saying 
contrary  to  the  doubt  and  hesitation  their  hearts  harbor.  They 
give  as  much  aid  as  they  can,  against  Allah’s  loyal  friends, 
and  support  those  who  deny  Allah,  His  Books  and  His 
Messengers.  This  is  how  the  hypocrites  commit  mischief  on 
earth,  while  thinking  that  they  are  doing  righteous  work  on 
earth.”131 

The  statement  by  Ibn  Jarir  is  true,  taking  the  disbelievers  as 
friends  is  one  of  the  categories  of  mischief  on  the  earth.  Allah 
said. 


ofj 


Hi 


& 


-h 


AAnd  those  who  disbelieve  are  allies  of  one  another,  if  you  do 
not  do  this  (help  each  other),  there  will  be  turmoil  and 
oppression  on  the  earth,  and  great  mischief  >  (8:73), 

In  this  way  Allah  severed  the  loyalty  between  the  believers 
and  the  disbelievers.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


tiiLLi  (£=*&■ 


AO  you  who  believe!  Do  not  take  disbelievers  as  Awliyd' 
(protectors  or  helpers  or  friends)  instead  of  believers.  Do  you 


'*'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :50. 
'2'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :51 . 
'3|  At-Tabari  1 :289 


133 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Parl-1) 


wish  to  offer  Allah  a  manifest  proof  against  yourselves?} 
(4:144). 

Allah  then  said, 


P  «  4  SflS®  St> 


iVerily,  the  hyprocrites  will  be  in  the  lowest  depth  of  the  Fire; 
no  helper  will  you  find  for  them}  (4:145). 

Since  the  outward  appearance  of  the  hypocrite  displays 
belief,  he  confuses  the  true  believers.  Hence,  the  deceitful 
behavior  of  the  hypocrites  is  an  act  of  mischief,  because  they 
deceive  the  believers  by  claiming  what  they  do  not  believe  in, 
and  because  they  give  support  and  loyalty  to  the  disbelievers 
against  the  believers. 

If  the  hypocrite  remains  a  disbeliever  (rather  than  pretending 
to  be  Muslim),  the  evil  that  results  from  him  would  be  less. 
Even  better,  if  the  hypocrite  becomes  sincere  with  Allah  and 
makes  the  statements  that  he  utters  conform  to  his  deeds,  he 
will  gain  success.  Allah  said, 


4  60 


iAttd  when  it  is  said  to  than  :  "Do  not  make  mischief  on  the  earth," 
they  say:  tr\Ne  are  only  peacanakers "}  meaning,  “We  seek  to  be 
friends  with  both  parties,  the  believers  and  the  disbelievers, 
and  to  have  peace  with  both  parties.”  Similarly,  Muhammad 
bin  Ishaq  reported  that  Ibn  'Abbas  said, 


i&Vf  4  l>i*2  &  &  60 


$And  when  it  is  said  to  them:  "Do  not  make  mischief  on  the  earth," 
they  say:  "We  are  only  peacemakers /'}  means,  “We  seek  to  make 
amends  between  the  believers  and  the  People  of  the  Book.”*1* 
Allah  said, 

jU  #  ^ 


4 Verily ,  they  are  the  ones  who  make  mischief,  but  they  perceive 
not.}.  This  Ayah  means  that  the  hypocrites'  behavior,  and  their 
claim  that  it  is  for  peace,  is  itself  mischief,  although  in  their 
ignorance,  they  do  not  see  it  to  be  mischief. 


|i] 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :52. 


134 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

XS  \U>  #  & 

1  <£S 

413.  And  when  it  is  said  to  them:  Believe  as  the  people 
believe ,"  They  say:  "Shall  we  believe  as  the  fools  have 
believed?"  Verily,  they  are  the  fools,  but  they  do  not  know.} 

Allah  said  that  if  the  hypocrites  are  told, 

4J& if  XS 

4"Believe  as  the  people  believe,"},  meaning,  ‘Believe  just  as  the 
believers  believe  in  Allah,  His  angels,  His  Books,  His 
Messengers,  Resurrection  after  death,  Paradise  and  Hellfire,  etc. 
And  obey  Allah  and  His  Messenger  by  heeding  the 
commandments  and  avoiding  the  prohibitions.’  Yet  the 
hypocrites  answer  by  saying, 

z r  $$  $£} 

4" Shall  we  believe  as  the  fools  have  believed?”}  they  meant  (may 
Allah  curse  the  hypocrites)  the  Companions  of  the  Messenger 
of  Allah  jg.  This  is  the  same  Tafsir  given  by  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  and 
As-Suddi  in  his  Tafsir,  with  a  chain  of  narration  to  Ibn  ‘Abbas, 
Ibn  Mas'ud  and  other  Companions.*1'  This  is  also  the  Tafsir  of 
Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  and  ‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Zayd  bin  Aslam.*2* 
The  hypocrites  said,  “Us  and  them  having  the  same  status, 
following  the  same  path,  while  they  are  fools?!”  The  fool’  is  the 
ignorant,  simple-minded  person  who  has  little  knowledge  in 
areas  of  benefit  and  harm.  This  is  why,  according  to  the 
majority  of  the  scholars,  Allah  used  the  term  foolish  to  include 
children,  when  He  said, 

4&i  #  a  $ &  $  iT Silt  •%} 

4And  do  not  give  your  property,  which  Allah  has  made  a 
means  of  support  for  you,  to  the  foolish}  (4:5). 

Allah  answered  the  hypocrites  in  all  of  these  instances.  For 
instance,  Allah  said  here, 

<* jU  '$} 


jU  4QL it  XX  &£\  Qtf  J&\  'if\i 


111  At-Tabari  1 :293. 
121  At-Tabari  1 :294 . 


335 


Surah  2.  AI-Baqarah  Q  -  24)  (Part-1) 

4  Verily,  they  are  the  fools}.  Allah  thus  affirmed  that  the 
hypocrites  are  indeed  the  fools,  yet, 

4S&  -4 


4But  they  know  not}.  Since  they  are  so  thoroughly  ignorant,  the 
hypocrites  are  unaware  of  their  degree  of  deviation  and 
ignorance,  and  such  situation  is  more  dangerous,  a  severer 
case  of  blindness,  and  further  from  the  truth  than  one  who  is 
aware. 


£  Cm  p. 


d\  >>  '»{j  u-i;  vs  i 

i  (**4^  4  (<j: 


434.  A  m3  when  they  meet  those  who  believe,  they  say:  "We 
believe,"  but  when  they  are  alone  with  their  Shaydtin  (devils), 
they  say:  "Truly,  we  are  with  you;  verily,  we  were  but 
mocking."} 

415.  Allah  mocks  at  them  and  leaves  them  increasing  in  their 
deviation  to  wander  blindly.} 


The  Hypocrites*  Cunning  and  Deceit 

Allah  said  that  when  the  hypocrites  meet  the  believers,  they 
proclaim  their  faith  and  pretend  to  be  believers,  loyalists  and 
friends.  They  do  this  to  misdirect,  mislead  and  deceive  the 
believers.  The  hypocrites  also  want  to  have  a  share  of  the 
benefits  and  gains  that  the  believers  might  possibly  acquire. 
Yet, 

4^1  fy} 

iBut  when  they  are  alone  with  their  Shayatin^,  meaning,  if  they  are 
alone  with  their  devils,  such  as  their  leaders  and  masters 
among  the  rabbis  of  the  Jews,  hypocrites  and  idolators. 


Human  and  Jinn  Devils 


Ibn  Jarir  said,  “The  devils  of  every  creation  are  the 
mischievous  among  them.  There  are  both  human  devils  and 
Jinn  devils.  Allah  said, 


<s?y_  Ip* 


136 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

iAnd  so  We  have  appointed  for  every  Prophet  enemies  - 
Shayatvn  (devils)  among  mankind  and  Jinn,  inspiring  one 
another  with  adorned  speech  as  a  delusion  (or  by  way  of 
deception)}  (6:112). 


The  Meaning  of  'Mocking* 

Allah  said, 

iThey  say:  "Truly,  we  are  with  you"}.  Muhammad  bin  Ishaq 
reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  the  Ayah  means,  “We  are 
with  you, 

£  C\} 

4 Verily ,  we  were  but  mocking},  meaning,  we  only  mock  people 
(the  believers)  and  deceive  them.”111  Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn 
‘Abbas  said  that  the  Ayah, 

£  C[} 

4  Verily,  we  were  but  mocking},  means,  “We  (meaning  the 
hypocrites)  were  mocking  the  Companions  of  Muhammad.”*2* 
Also,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  and  Qatadah  said  similarly.*3*  Allah’s 
statement. 


iAlldh  mocks  at  them  and  leaves  them  increasing  in  their  deviation  to 
wander  blindly}  answers  the  hypocrites  and  punishes  them  for 
their  behavior.  Ibn  Jarir  commented,  “Allah  mentioned  what  He 
will  do  to  them  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection,  when  He  said, 


4^ in  vV  ’A  Jj U  frA. 


40n  the  Day  when  the  hypocrites  —  men  and  women  —  will 
say  to  the  believers:  " Wait  for  us!  Let  us  get  something  from 
your  light!”  It  will  be  said:  "Go  back  to  your  rear!  Then  seek  a 


111  At-Tabari  1 :300. 
121  Ibid. 

131  Ibid. 


137 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  ( Parti 1 


light!"  So  a  wall  will  be  put  up  between  them,  with  a  gate 
therein.  Inside  it  will  be  mercy,  and  outside  it  will  be 
torment. ^  (57:13),  and, 


iAnd  let  not  the  disbelievers  think  that  Our  postponing  of  their 
punishment  is  good  for  them.  We  postpone  the  punishment  only 
so  that  they  may  increase  in  shiftiness.}  (3:178).” 

He  then  said,  “This,  and  its  like,  is  Allah’s  mockery  of  the 
hypocrites  and  the  people  of  Shirk.” 


The  Hypocrites  suffering  for  their  Plots 


Allah  stated  that  He  will  punish  the  hypocrites  for  their 
mockery,  using  the  same  terms  to  describe  both  the  deed  and 
its  punishment,  although  the  meaning  is  different.  Similarly, 
Allah  said, 


iThe  recompense  for  an  offense  is  an  offense  equal  to  it;  but 
whoever  forgives  and  makes  reconciliation,  his  reward  is  with 
Allah ^  (42:40),  and, 


iThen  whoever  transgresses  (the  prohibition)  against  you, 
transgress  likewise  against  him}  (2:194). 

The  first  act  is  an  act  of  injustice,  while  the  second  act  is 
an  act  of  justice.  So  both  actions  carry  the  same  name,  while 
being  different  in  reality.  This  is  how  the  scholars  explain 
deceit,  cunning  and  mocking  when  attributed  to  Allah  in  the 
Qur’an.  Surely,  Allah  exacts  revenge  for  certain  evil  acts  with  a 
punishment  that  is  similar  in  nature  to  the  act  itself.  We 
should  affirm  here  that  Allah  does  not  do  these  things  out  of 
joyful  play,  according  to  the  consensus  of  the  scholars,  but  as 
a  just  form  of  punishment  for  certain  evil  acts. 


Meaning  of  ‘Leaves  them  increasing  in  their  deviation  to 
wander  blindly  * 

Allah  said, 


138 


Tafsir  1 bn  Kgthfr 


JL'  •  .  "•!>  .  >  >.y,,  Y 

tm>4— i  4  jM*yr 

iAllah  mocks  at  them  and  leaves  them  increasing  in  their  deviation  to 
wander  blindly}.  As-Suddi  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Ibn  Mas'ud 
and  several  other  Companions  of  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said 
that. 


iand  leaves  them  increasing}  means,  He  gives  them  respite.1*1 
Also,  Mujahid  said,  “He  (causes  their  deviation)  to  increase.”*2* 
Allah  said; 


^  Ji  ^  **  LJ  0>- — 


^Do  they  think  that  by  the  wealth  and  the  children  with  which 
We  augment  them.  (That)  We  hasten  to  give  them  with  good 
things.  Nay,  but  they  perceive  not.}  (23:55-56). 

Ibn  Jarir  commented,  “The  correct  meaning  of  this  Ayah  is 
*We  give  them  increase  from  the  view  of  giving  them  respite 
and  leaving  them  in  their  deviation  and  rebellion.’  Similarly, 
Allah  said, 


-^0  j  jfc  &  *  $  &  fezfc  p'4 


iAnd  We  shall  turn  their  hearts  and  their  eyes  away  (from 
guidance),  as  they  refused  to  believe  in  it  the  first  time,  and  We 
sluill  leave  them  in  their  trespass  to  wander  blindly}.” 
(6:1 10).*3* 

Tughyan  used  in  this  Ayah  means  to  transgress  the  limits, 
just  as  Allah  said  in  another  Ayah, 

j  &>'  &  # 


iVerily,  when  the  water  Taghd  (rose)  beyond  its  limits,  We 
carried  you  in  the  ship}  (69:11). 

Also,  Ibn  Jarir  said  that  the  term  'Amah,  in  the  Ayah  means, 
‘deviation’.  He  also  said  about  Allah’s  statement, 

**'  At-Tabari  1:311. 

*2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :57. 

*3'  At-Tabari  1  :307 


iin  their  deviation  to  wander},  “In  the  misguidance  and  disbelief 
that  has  encompassed  them,  causing  them  to  be  confused  and 
unable  to  find  a  way  out  of  it.  This  is  because  Allah  has 
stamped  their  hearts,  sealed  them,  and  blinded  their  vision. 
Therefore,  they  do  not  recognize  guidance  or  find  the  way  out  of 
their  deviation. 


<16.  These  are  they  who  have  purchased  error  with  guidance, 
so  their  commerce  was  profitless.  And  they  were  not  guided .} 

In  his  Tafsir,  As-Suddi  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  and  Ibn 
Mas'ud  commented  on; 


i&4\  jfcUii  &  34$} 


iTIiese  are  they  who  have  purchased  error  with  guidance}  saying  it 
means,  “They  pursued  misguidance  and  abandoned  guidance.” 
Mujahid  said,  “They  believed  and  then  disbelieved,”  while 
Qatadah  said,  “They  preferred  deviation  to  guidance.” 
Qatadah’s  statement  is  similar  in  meaning  to  Allah’s  statement 
about  Thamud, 


J  £ 


iAnd  as  for  Thamud,  We  granted  them  guidance,  but  they 
preferred  blindness  to  guidance}  (41:17). 

In  summary,  the  statements  that  we  have  mentioned  from 
the  scholars  of  Tafsir  indicate  that  the  hypocrites  deviate  from 
the  true  guidance  and  prefer  misguidance,  substituting 
wickedness  in  place  of  righteousness.  This  meaning  explains 
Allah’s  statement, 


34$} 


{These  are  they  who  have  purchased  error  with  guidance}, 
meaning,  they  exchanged  guidance  to  buy  misguidance.  This 
meaning  includes  those  who  first  believed,  then  later 
disbelieved,  whom  Allah  described, 


lM  Al-Tabari  1 :309. 


f ,  ®"s  ,  1  ,  »  V??  bx  si 

4-s'B-b 

\w1(-.  ■■?.-, t-in,  L.«..,.«  ^,(  ®  te““se 

believed,  and  then 

^6jSk-4*^SJ^.S^S41  tsMi‘vei:  therfr‘ 

(63:3 £“’’  "*  S“C  * 

includes^  those  '£ 
.s^.,a»jj4liftL^jiJ  preferred  deviation 

rypoc?rrf:?,  2s 

several  categories. 

2i*  ls  why  AUSh 

tSjy  **  IX  tfj  ci; 

'■>-hC,$fUy  lij  yJJ  ^  3(j\j  <X»>Xo 

xii i  o j  ^ ^  pj  ^ i X4-*  \jc>*\j*. 4^  ojj~*  \j> u  ^So  their  commerce  was 
Jjljb&J&ti  0 Pr°fitless-  And  they 

/*>*  .r\r<\h' \(' >au"*'  i"ft!  were  not  guidedh 

meaning  their  trade 
—  I  did  not  succeed  nor 

were  they  righteous  or  rightly  guided  throughout  all  this.  In 
addition,  Ibn  Jarir  narrated  that  Qatadah  commented  on  the 
Ayah, 

4<£wlji 


iSo  their  commerce  was  profitless.  And  they  were  not  guided K  “By 
Allah!  I  have  seen  them  leaving  guidance  for  deviation,  leaving 
the  Jama'ah  (the  community  of  the  believers)  for  the  sects, 
leaving  safety  for  fear,  and  the  Sunnah  for  innovation.”*1*  Ibn 
Abi  Hatim  also  reported  other  similar  statements.*2* 


j  tfjs  in  cz  fo  u  iitsl  cs  4?  ^  (4i£.> 


(1*  At-Tabari  1 :316. 

*2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :60 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Part-1) 


141 


417.  Their  likeness  is  as  the  likeness  of  one  who  kindled  a  fire; 
then,  when  it  illuminated  all  around  him,  Allah  removed  their 
light  and  left  them  in  darkness.  (So)  they  could  not  see}. 

418.  They  are  deaf,  dumb,  and  blind,  so  they  return  not  (to  the 
right  path).} 


The  Example  of  the  Hypocrites 

Allah  likened  the  hypocrites  when  they  bought  deviation  with 
guidance,  thus  acquiring  utter  blindness,  to  the  example  of  a 
person  who  started  a  fire.  When  the  fire  was  lit,  and 
illumnitated  the  surrounding  area,  the  person  benefited  from  it 
and  felt  safe.  Then  the  fire  was  suddenly  extinguished. 
Therefore,  total  darkness  covered  this  person,  and  he  became 
unable  to  see  anything  or  find  his  way  out  of  it.  Further,  this 
person  could  not  hear  or  speak  and  became  so  blind  that  even 
if  there  were  light,  he  would  not  be  able  to  see.  This  is  why  he 
cannot  return  to  the  state  that  he  was  in  before  this  happened 
to  him.  Such  is  the  case  with  the  hypocrites  who  preferred 
misguidance  over  guidance,  deviation  over  righteousness.  This 
parable  indicates  that  the  hypocrites  first  believed,  then 
disbelieved,  just  as  Allah  stated  in  other  parts  of  the  Qur’an. 
Allah’s  statement, 

4Alldh  removed  their  light}  means,  Allah  removed  what  benefits 
them,  and  this  is  the  light,  and  He  left  them  with  what  harms 
them,  that  is,  the  darkness  and  smoke.  Allah  said, 

4And  left  thetn  in  darkness},  that  is  their  doubts,  disbelief  and 
hypocrisy. 

4  (So)  they  could  not  see}  meaning,  they  are  unable  to  find  the 
correct  path  or  find  its  direction.  In  addition,  they  are, 

idea/}  and  thus  cannot  hear  the  guidance, 


142 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlnr 


4dumb}  and  cannot  utter  the  words  that  might  benefit  them, 

<UJ±> 


iand  blitxd^  in  total  darkness  and  deviation.  Similarly,  Allah 
said, 


4  £  ^  -i  Qfr 


4Verily,  it  is  not  the  eyes  that  grow  blind,  but  it  is  the  hearts  which 
are  in  the  breasts  that  grow  blind >  (22:46)  and  this  why  they 
cannot  get  back  to  the  state  of  guidance  that  they  were  in, 
since  they  sold  it  for  misguidance. 


419.  Or  like  a  rainstorm  in  the  sky,  bringing  darkness, 
thunder,  and  lightning.  They  thrust  their  fingers  in  their  ears 
to  keep  out  the  stunning  thunderclap  for  fear  of  death.  But 
Allah  ever  encompasses  the  disbelievers .  } 

420.  The  lightning  almost  snatches  away  their  sight,  whenever 
it  flashes  for  them,  they  walk  therein,  and  when  darkness  covers 
them,  they  stand  still.  And  if  Allah  willed.  He  could  have  taken 
aivay  their  hearing  and  their  sight.  Certainly,  Allah  has  poioer 
over  all  things.} 


Another  Parable  of  the  Hypocrites 

This  is  another  parable  which  Allah  gave  about  the 
hypocrites  who  sometimes  know  the  truth  and  doubt  it  at 
other  times.  When  they  suffer  from  doubt,  confusion  and 
disbelief,  their  hearts  are, 

iy 

4Like  a  Sayyib},  meaning,  "The  rain”,  as  Ibn  Mas'ud,  Ibn  'Abbas, 
and  several  other  Companions  have  confirmed*1'  as  well  as 

m 


At-Tabari  1 :334 . 


143 


Surah  2.  AhBaciargh  (1  -  24)  ( Parti 1 

Abu  Al-'Aliyah,  Mujahid,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  ‘Ata\  Al-Hasan  Al- 
Basri,  Qatadah,  ‘Atiyah  Al-‘Awfi,  ‘Ata’  Al-Khurasani,  As-Suddi 
and  Ar-Rabl'  bin  Anas.111  Ad-DahheLk  said  “It  is  the  clouds. ",21 
However,  the  most  accepted  opinion  is  that  it  means  the  rain 
that  comes  down  during, 

ile&} 


^darkness},  meaning,  here,  the  doubts,  disbelief  and  hypocrisy. 


4  thunder}  that  shocks  the  hearts  with  fear.  The  hypocrites  are 
usually  full  of  fear  and  anxiety,  just  as  Allah  described  them, 


}They  think  that  every  cry  is  against  them }  (63:4),  and, 

(A  rr!  M 

ft  ')  40^  ££ 


4They  swear  by  Allah  that  they  are  truly  of  you  while  they  are 
not  of  you,  but  they  are  a  people  who  are  afraid.  Should  they 
find  refuge,  or  caves,  or  a  place  of  concealment,  they  would 
turn  straightway  thereto  in  a  swift  rush }  (9:56-57). 


4The  lightning},  is  in  reference  to  the  light  of  faith  that  is 
sometimes  felt  in  the  hearts  of  the  hypocrites, 


\4  SS&  oyjf  jJu 


'  I  ~ 


iThey  thrust  their  fingers  in  their  ears  to  keep  out  the  stunning 
thunderclap  for  fear  of  death .  But  Alldlt  ever  encompasses  the 
disbelievers meaning,  their  cautiousness  does  not  benefit  them 
because  they  are  bound  by  Allah's  all-encompassing  will  and 
decision.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


I1'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :66. 
121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :67. 


244 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

iHas  the  story  readied  you  of  two  hosts.  Of  Fir' awn  (Pharaoh) 
and  Thamiid?  Nay!  The  disbelievers  (persisted)  in  denying. 
And  Allah  encompasses  them  from  behind !}  (85:17-20). 

Allah  then  said, 

ijfeiS  viii  &} 

iThe  lightning  almost  snatches  aivay  their  sight }  meaning,  because 
the  lightning  is  strong  itself,  and  because  their  comprehension 
is  weak  and  does  not  allow  them  to  embrace  the  faith.  Also,  ‘Ali 
bin  Abi  Talhah  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented  on  the 
Ayah, 

tS  iJikie  (iJjl 


iThe  lightning  almost  snatches  away  their  sight},  “The  Qur’an 
mentioned  almost  all  of  the  secrets  of  the  hypocrites.”*1'  ‘Ali  bin 
Abi  Talhah  also  narrated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 

i  $  itSI 


iWhenever  it  flashes  for  them,  they  walk  therein },  “Whenever  the 
hypocrites  acquire  a  share  in  the  victories  of  Islam,  they  are 
content  with  this  share.  Whenever  Islam  suffers  a  calamity, 
they  are  ready  to  revert  to  disbelief.”.121  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


iAnd  among  mankind  is  he  who  ivorships  Allah  on  the  edge :  If  good 
befalls  him,  he  is  content  with  that.}  (22:11).  Also,  Muhammad  bin 
Ishaq  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 


i\>te  *j  iji:  (4i  iC3,i  &} 


iWhenever  it  fashes  for  them,  they  walk  therein,  and  when  darkness 
covers  them,  they  stand  still}, 

“They  recognize  the  truth  and  speak  about  it.  So  their  speech 
is  upright,  but  when  they  revert  to  disbeleif,  they  again  fall 
into  confusion. ”*31  This  was  also  said  by  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Al- 
Hasan  Al-Basri,  Qatadah,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  and  As-Suddi, 
who  narrated  it  from  the  Companions,  and  it  is  the  most 


111  At-Tabari  1  :349. 
121  Ibid. 

*3'  At-Tabari  1  :346. 


145 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Part-1) 


obvious  and  most  correct  view,  and  Allah  knows  best.’1* 
Consequently,  on  the  Day  of  Judgment,  the  believers  will  be 
given  a  light  according  to  the  degree  of  their  faith.  Some  of 
them  will  gain  light  that  illuminates  over  a  distance  of  several 
miles,  some  more,  some  less.  Some  people’s  light  will  glow 
sometimes  and  be  extinguished  at  other  times.  They  will, 
therefore,  walk  on  the  Sirat  (the  bridge  over  the  Fire)  in  the 
light,  stopping  when  it  is  extinguished.  Some  people  will  have 
no  light  at  all,  these  are  the  hypocrites  whom  Allah  described 
when  He  said, 


It 


/  /  ^  y  *  I  ✓  /  >  /i*#  |  1/  V 

\ ijf  J [)  o \jMjlL J\  JjL 


Vs 


iOn  the  Day  when  the  hypocrites  -  men  and  women  -  will 
say  to  the  believers :  "Wait  for  us!  Let  us  get  something  from 
your  light!”  It  will  be  said  to  them;  "Go  back  to  you  rear!  Then 
seek  a  light!”}  (57:13). 

Allah  described  the  believers, 


o;  V4  (yf  VJ~‘-  '■ft  r*js  Cs-i  'r~-i ijj  fjfr 

VfH 


iOn  the  Day  you  shall  see  the  believing  men  and  the  believing 
women  -  their  light  running  forward  before  them  and  by  their 
right  hands.  Glad  tidings  for  you  this  Day!  Gardens  under 
which  rivers  flow  (Paradise)}  (57:12),  and, 


(iijy  |£X  OiJ'j  i-1'  ii'  VA  H  fy_} 


Vd. _  »1£  .m&\  tt 


4The  Day  that  Allah  will  not  disgrace  the  Prophet  (Muhammad 
2g)  and  those  who  believe  with  him.  Their  Light  will  run 
forward  before  them  and  (with  their  Records  —  Books  of  deeds) 
in  their  right  hands.  They  will  say:  "Our  Lord!  Keep  perfect 
our  Light  for  us  [and  do  not  put  it  off  till  we  cross  over  the 
Sirdt  (a  slippery  bridge  over  the  Hell)  safely]  and  grant  us 
forgiveness.  Verily,  You  are  Able  to  do  all  things"}  (66:8). 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  narrated  that  ‘Abdullah  bin  Mas'ud 


*'*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :75. 


146 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


commented  on, 


iTheir  Light  will  run  forward  before  them “They  will  pass  on  the 
Sirat.  according  to  their  deeds.  The  light  that  some  people  have 
will  be  as  big  as  a  mountain,  while  the  light  of  others  will  be  as 
big  as  a  date  tree.  The  people  who  will  have  the  least  light  are 
those  whose  index  fingers  will  sometimes  be  lit  and 
extinguished  at  other  times.”*1'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  also  reported 
that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Every  person  among  the  people  of 
Tawhid  (Islamic  Monotheism)  will  gain  a  light  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection.  As  for  the  hypocrite,  his  light  will  be 
extinguished.  When  the  believers  witness  the  hypocrite’s  light 
being  extinguished,  they  will  feel  anxious.  Hence,  they  will 
supplicate, 

iOur  Lord!  Keep  perfect  our  Light  for  Ad-Dahhak  bin 

Muzahim  said,  “On  the  Day  of  Resurrection,  everyone  who  has 
embraced  the  faith  will  be  given  a  light.  When  they  arrive  at  the 
Sirat,  the  light  of  the  hypocrites  will  be  extinguished.  When  the 
believers  see  this,  they  will  feel  anxious  and  supplicate, 

<V>y  u 

^Owr  Lord!  Keep  perfect  our  Light  far  ws£.” 

Types  of  Believers  and  Types  of  Disbelievers 

Consequently,  there  are  several  types  of  people.  There  are 
the  believers  whom  the  first  four  Ayat  (2:2-5)  in  Surat  Al- 
Baqarah  describe.  There  are  the  disbelievers  who  were 
described  in  the  next  two  Ayat  And  there  are  two  categories  of 
hypocrites:  the  complete  hypocrites  who  were  mentioned  in  the 
parable  of  the  fire,  and  the  hesitant  hypocrites,  whose  light  of 
faith  is  sometimes  lit  and  sometimes  extinguished.  The  parable 
of  the  rain  was  revealed  about  this  category,  which  is  not  as 
evil  as  the  first  category. 


111  At-Tabari  23:3179. 
121  Al-Hakim  2:495. 


149 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Part-1) 


lamp,  a  sealed  heart  with  a  knot  tied  around  its  seal,  a  heart 
that  is  turned  upside  down  and  a  wrapped  heart.  As  for  the 
polished  heart,  it  is  the  heart  of  the  believer  and  the  lamp  is  the 
light  of  faith.  The  sealed  heart  is  the  heart  of  the  disbeliever. 
The  heart  that  is  turned  upside  down  is  the  heart  of  the  pure 
hypocrite,  because  he  had  knowledge  but  denied  it.  As  for  the 
wrapped  heart,  it  is  a  heart  that  contains  belief  and  hypocrisy. 
The  example  of  faith  in  this  heart,  is  the  example  of  the  herb 
that  is  sustained  by  pure  water.  The  example  of  hypocrisy  in  it, 
is  the  example  of  an  ulcer  that  thrives  on  puss  and  blood. 
Whichever  of  the  two  substances  has  the  upper  hand,  it  will 
have  the  upper  hand  on  that  heart*.  This  Hadith  has  a  Jay  id 
Hasan  (good)  chain  of  narration.11* 


Allah  said, 

f  if  ^  i'^*  >  it***'* 


iAnd  if  Allah  willed,  He  would  have  taken  away  their  hearing  and 
their  sight.  Certainly,  Allah  has  power  over  all  things}.  Muhammad 
bin  Ishaq  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented  on  Allah’s 
statement, 

VJ“^*  j>j} 


iAnd  if  Allah  willed,  He  would  have  taken  away  tlteir  hearing  and 
tlteir  sight},  “Because  they  abandoned  the  truth  after  they  had 
knowledge  in  it.” 

ij.4  tif  f  if 

iCertainly,  Allah  has  power  over  all  things}.  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 
“Allah  is  able  to  punish  or  pardon  His  servants  as  He  wills.”*2’ 
Ibn  Jarir  commented,  “Allah  only  described  Himself  with  the 
ability  to  do  everything  in  this  Ayah  as  a  warning  to  the 
hypocrites  of  His  control  over  everything,  and  to  inform  them 
that  His  ability  completely  encompasses  them  and  that  He  is 
able  to  take  away  their  hearing  and  sight.”*3’ 

Ibn  Jarir  and  several  other  scholars  of  Tafsir  stated  that 
these  two  parables  are  about  the  same  kind  of  hypocrite.  So 


1,1  Ahmad  3:17. 

*2’  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :76 
*3>  At-Tabari  1 :361 . 


150 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


the  ‘or’  mentioned  in, 

40r  like  a  rainstorm  fron,  rky}  means  ‘and’,  just  as  the  Ayah, 

}  -s  >  4’*  (*ri  £4?*  'tjf 

4 And  obey  neither  a  c>:  •:  >sbelicver  among  them}.  Therefore, 

‘or’  in  the  Ayah  inclu  i.  lice  of  using  either  example  for 

the  hypocrites.  Also,  M  Qv.  i  said  that  ‘or’  means,  “To  show 
compatibility  of  the  two  cln  c.es,  just  as  when  one  says,  ‘Sit 
with  Al-Hasui.  or  Ibn  Sirin.’  According  to  the  view  of  Az- 
Zamakhshai  i,  'so  it  means  each  of  these  persons  is  the  same  as 
the  other,  so  you  may  sit  with  either  one  of  them.’  The  meaning 
of  ‘or’  thus  becomes  ‘either.’  Allah  gave  these  two  examples  of 
the  hypocrites,  because  they  both  perfectly  describe  them.” 

I  (Ibn  Kathir)  say,  these  descriptions  are  related  to  the  type 
of  hypocrite,  because  there  is  a  difkn  nee  between  them  as  we 
stated.  For  instance,  Allah  mentioned  these  types  in  Surat 
Bara’ah  (chapter  9)  when  He  repeat vJ  the  statement,  “And 
among  them”  three  times,  describing  their  types, 
characteristics,  statements  and  deeds.  So  the  two  examples 
mentioned  here  describe  two  types  of  hypocrites  whose 
characteristics  are  similar.  For  instance  Allah  gave  two 
examples  in  Surat  An-Nur,  one  for  the  advocates  of  disbelief 
and  one  for  the  followers  of  disbelief,  He  said, 

^JrS'  foZA  'cj&j} 


4-As  for  those  who  disbelieved,  their  deeds  are  like  a  mirage  in  a 
desert}  (24:39),  until, 


Jf-  j  *7^41^  $} 


iOr  (the  state  of  a  disbeliever)  is  like  the  darkness  in  a  vast 
deep  sea}  (24:40). 


The  first  example  is  of  the  advocates  of  disbelief  who  have 
complex  ignorance,  while  the  second  is  about  the  followers 
who  have  simple  ignorance.  Allah  knows  best. 


&  ^ « tSs  p:>  W 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Part-1) 


252 


fis  tj'Sj  &  'jLic- 

<21 .  O  mankind!  Worship  your  lord  (Allah),  Who  created  you 
and  those  who  were  before  you  so  that  you  may  acquire 
Taqwd .} 

<22.  Who  has  made  the  earth  a  resting  place  for  you,  and  the 
sky  as  a  canopy,  and  sent  down  water  (rain)  from  the  sky  and 
brought  forth  therewith  fruits  as  a  provision  for  you.  Then  do 
not  set  up  rivals  unto  Allah  (in  worship)  while  you  know  (tlwt 
He  alone  has  the  right  to  be  worshipped).} 


Tawhid  Al-Uluhiyyah 

Allah  next  mentioned  His  Oneness  in  divinity  and  stated  that 
He  has  favored  His  servants  by  bringing  them  to  life  after  they 
did  not  exist.  He  also  surrounded  them  with  blessings,  both 
hidden  and  apparent.  He  made  the  earth  a  resting  place  for 
them,  just  like  the  bed,  stable  with  the  firm  mountains. 


iAnd  the  sky  as  a  canopy >  meaning,  ‘a  ceiling’.  Similarly,  Allah 
said  in  another  Ayah, 


}And  We  have  made  the  heaven  a  roof,  safe  and  well-guarded. 
Yet  they  turn  away  from  its  signs  (i.e.  sun,  moon,  winds, 
clouds)  M2 1:32). 


<£  .til  &  ^ 


iAnd  sends  down  for  you  water  (rain)  from  the  sky}  meaning, 
through  the  clouds,  when  they  need  the  rain.  Hence,  Allah 
caused  the  various  types  of  vegetation  and  fruits  to  grow  as  a 
means  of  sustenance  for  people  and  their  cattle.  Allah 
reiterated  this  bounty  in  various  parts  of  the  Qur’an. 

There  is  another  Ayah  that  is  similar  to  this  Ayah  (2:22), 
that  is,  Allah’s  statement, 


oPX  *3  «  £3  AVf  <&} 

<*i£ it  -4-6  as  )t=4j  as  fa  $ 


ilt  is  He  Who  has  made  for  you  the  earth  as  a  dwelling  place 


152 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


and  the  sky  as  a  canopy,  and  has  given  you  shape  and  made 
your  shapes  good  (looking)  and  has  provided  you  with  good 
things.  That  is  Allah,  your  Lord,  so  Blessed  be  Allah,  the  Lord 
of  all  that  exists}  (40:64). 

The  meaning  that  is  reiterated  here  is  that  Allah  is  the 
Creator,  the  Sustainer,  the  Owner  and  Provider  of  this  life,  all 
that  is  in  and  on  it.  Hence,  He  alone  deserves  to  be 
worshipped,  and  no  one  and  nothing  is  to  be  associated  with 
Him.  This  is  why  Allah  said  next, 

4  <,£2  pi  ftjJ  <4 

4Then  do  not  set  up  rivals  unto  Allah  (in  worship)  while  you 
know  (that  He  alone  has  the  right  to  be  worshipped )}  (2:22). 

The  Two  Sahihs  record  that  Ibn  Mas*ud  said,  “I  said  to  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jfe;,  Which  evil  deed  is  the  worst  with  Allah?’ 
He  said, 

It  jJSj  \ju  4)  Japu  ji® 


«To  take  an  equal  with  Allah,  ivhile  He  alone  created 


Also,  Mu'adh  narrated  the  Prophet’s  statement, 

il:.^  aj  i  j  ojjlaj  5*^1  J*-  ta  ^ j _ij i'¬ 


ll  Do  you  know  Allah's  right  on  His  servants?  They  must 
worship  Him  alone  and  refrain  from  associating  anything  with 
Him  in  worship  V2’  Another  HacLlth  states, 


ni  li  auu  u  :  jb  igi'j  Jiij  Jii  ni.  u  'Jj2\  it 


tNone  of  you  should  say,  'What  Allah  and  so-and-so  person 
wills.  Rather,  let  him  say,  'What  Allah  wills,  and  then  what 
so-and-so  person  wills  .»|31 


A  Hadith  with  the  same  Meaning 

Imam  Ahmad  narrated  that  Al-Harith  Al-Ash‘ari  said  that  the 
Prophet  of  Allah  said, 

111  Fath  Al-Bari  8 :350  and  Muslim  1 :90. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  13:359  and  Muslim  1 :59. 

131  Ahmad  5:384,  394,  398. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (1  -  24)  (Part-1) 


153 


k if!  ol  4^  ^t£'j  J-:  J!1 

fr^  cr1^  ^  Jlii  i  Lfj  ijali  ji  SIS'  <,\j  IJUiS  ji  J Olp-J  ^  pk  jp 
^pi-v  ji  ^  Ji^j  ji  c-»UI^  ^^>xj  (  ji  iui  i  ^  VJLJl 


if 


j! 


JUI 


c4  ^ 


IJ  : Jlii  ijpJJ  jl  iStJ  ji  U^i 
^-aijl  ^  J  J4*p-!  i?  ^y;  <— i-l^u  ;i  Oipf 

ii  j[  :JU  p  aILS  jLkp  it  JuiJ  pjljl  JU  JoUi  iA>jLJi  b£i  J>- 
it  1j-lP  ji  :  J$Jjf  ^  ipi*;  ji  ppp  J&  oi 
<oj>.  f}^  if  'V-  csS^'  J^j  ^  jji  i  *  psjii  V  j 
oap  j^j  ji  J!  -cii  ti^}d3  J***  Jipj  ^S 

e^AjaJL  ppp  .  illi.  aj  \j5jjj;  ojxi-ii  p^ij33  «fci  jp  iJuiS 

p yP  •  p~L*>  IS^i  C..X.L  p  U  ojup  o-jJ  <£>■ j  it  j^i 

Cri  -***  r^5  5i^  ^  4^  if  5i*  ^  <Jr3  ^Ji  j^  fCJL 
oxkJL  pJJj  .  4LLJI  i^  il  alp  4-i*1  p  pp*  jp  4LLJI 

*&*  &*  ^J\  +*Al  j-u3l  opf  J^J  jiis  ilJS  JiS  j^ 

ar^ip  J4*^  (*^f  ci-Pd  Ji>**  p4  ipf  of  pJ  Ji  :  pJ  Jlii 

J&  &  J^  iui  jp  1^  ii  /ij  j lipp  ili  > 

ja  lij&i  U  jjas-lxi!'  jjj  ?J  »jjl  ^ 

•jill  ^  jl^  lil  jllalljl 


11 Allah  commanded  Yahyd  bin  Zakariya  to  implement  five 
commands  and  to  order  the  Children  of  Israel  to  implement 
them,  but  Yaliyd  was  slow  in  carrying  out  these  commands. 
‘Isa  said  to  Yahyd,  'You  were  ordered  to  implement  five 
commands  and  to  order  the  Children  of  Israel  to  implement 
them.  So  either  order,  or  I  will  do  it.’  Yahyd  said,  'My  brother! 
I  fear  that  if  you  do  it  before  me,  I  will  be  punished  or  the  earth 
will  be  slwken  under  my  feet.'  Hence,  Yahyd  bin  Zakariya 
called  the  Children  of  Israel  to  Bayt  Al-Maqdis  (Jerusalem), 
until  they  filled  the  Masjid.  He  sat  on  the  balcony,  thanked 
Allah  and  praised  him  and  then  said,  'Allah  ordered  me  to 
implement  five  commandments  and  that  I  should  order  you  to 
adhere  to  thetn.  The  first  is  that  you  worship  Allah  alone  and 


154 


Tapir  Urn  Kathir 


not  associate  any  with  Him.  The  example  of  this  command  is 
the  example  of  a  man  who  bought  a  servant  from  his  money 
with  paper  or  gold.  The  servant  started  to  work  for  the  master, 
but  was  paying  the  profits  to  another  person.  IA7to  among  you 
would  like  his  servant  to  do  that?  Allah  created  you  and 
sustains  you.  Therefore,  worship  Him  alone  and  do  not 
associate  anything  with  Him.  I  also  command  you  to  pray,  for 
Allah  directs  His  Face  towards  His  servant's  face,  as  long  as 
the  servant  does  not  turn  away.  So  when  you  pray,  do  not  turn 
your  heads  to  and  fro.  I  also  command  you  to  fast.  The  example 
of  it  is  the  example  of  a  man  in  a  group  of  men  and  he  has 
some  musk  wrapped  in  a  piece  of  cloth,  and  consequently,  all  of 
the  group  smells  the  scent  of  the  wrapped  musk.  Verily,  the 
odor  of  the  mouth  of  a  fasting  person  is  better  before  Allah  than 
the  scent  of  musk.  I  also  command  you  to  give  charity.  The 
example  of  this  is  the  example  of  a  man  who  was  captured  by 
the  enemy.  They  tied  his  hands  to  his  neck  and  brought  him 
forth  to  cut  off  his  neck.  He  said  to  them,  'Can  I  pay  a  ransom 
for  myseip’  He  kept  ransoming  himself  with  small  and  large 
amounts  until  he  liberated  himself.  I  also  command  you  to 
always  remember  Allah.  The  example  of  this  deed  is  that  of  a 
man  who  the  enemy  is  tirelessly  pursuing.  He  takes  refuge  in  a 
fortified  fort.  When  the  servant  remembers  Allah,  he  will  be 
resorting  to  the  best  refuge  from  Satan  J 

AI-Harith  then  narrated  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  sg  said, 


iplLltj  ^Li\j  ^ iy *1  4:1  jA  Utj11 

<i!p  iijj  iii  f-C.  ipUAJl  .41  ^ 

41  Jj-ij  11  :  IjJt*  ipr  Ji  ji*  >1>1 

^ll  i  Jit  '^jj  jtj*  :Jlii 

*41  Slle-  It  pr J  jp  41  ^ LI—  U  Hi L 


a  And  I  order  you  with  five  commandments  that  Allah  has 
ordered  me.  Stick  to  the  Jama' ah  (community  of  the  faithfid), 
listen  and  obey  (your  leaders)  and  perform  Hijrah  (migration) 
and  Jihad  for  the  sake  of  Allah.  Wlwever  abandons  the  Jamd'ah, 
even  the  distance  of  a  hand  span,  will  have  removed  the  tie  of 
Islam  from  his  neck,  unless  he  returns.  Whoever  uses  the 


Sutwh  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24}  (Parti} _  ]5 

slogans  of  Jahiliyah  (the  pf  :‘.mic  period  of  ignorance)  he  will 
be  among  those  kneeling  in  <rJiannam  (Hellfire) .»  They  said 
“O  Messenger  of  Allah!  F  ■  ■;  if  he  prays  and  fasts?”  He 
said,  “Even  if  he  prays,  fasts  and  claims  to  be  Muslim.  So  call 
the  Muslims  with  their  i.  <  that  Allah  has  called  them :  'The 
Muslims,  the  believing  sc.  \  tls  of  Allah  * 

This  is  a  Hasan  Hadlth,  >.nd  it  contains  the  statement,  “Allah 
has  created  and  sustain;;  you,  so  worship  Him  and  do  not 
associate  anything  with  Him  in  worship.”  This  statement  is 
relevant  in  the  Ayat  (2:2)  -22)  we  are  discussing  here  and 
supports  singling  Allah  in  worship,  without  partners. 


Signs  of  Allah’s  Existence 


Several  scholars  of  Tafsir,  like  Ar-Razi  and  others,  used 
these  Ayat  as  an  argument  for  the  existence  of  the  Creator, 
and  it  is  a  most  worthy  method  of  argument.  Indeed,  whoever 
ponders  over  the  things  thal  exist,  the  higher  and  lower 
creatures,  their  various  shapes,  colors,  behavior,  benefits  and 
ecological  roles,  then  he  will  realize  the  ability,  wisdom, 
knowledge,  perfection  and  majesty  of  their  Creator.  Once  a 
bedouin  was  asked  about  the  evidence  to  Allah’s  existence,  he 
responded,  “All  praise  is  due  to  Allah!  The  camel’s  dung 
testifies  to  the  existence  of  the  camel,  and  the  track  testifies  to 
the  fact  that  someone  was  walking.  A  sky  that  holds  the  giant 
stars,  a  land  that  has  fairways  and  a  sea  that  has  waves,  does 
not  all  of  this  testily  that  the  Most  Kind,  Most  Knowledgeable 
exists?”12' 


Hence,  whoever  gazes  at  the  sky  in  its  immensity,  its 
expanse,  and  the  various  kinds  of  planets  in  it,  some  of  which 
appear  stationary  in  the  sky  -  whoever  gazes  at  the  seas  that 
surround  the  land  from  all  sides,  and  the  mountains  that  were 
placed  on  the  earth  to  stabilize  it,  so  that  whoever  lives  on 
land,  whatever  their  shape  and  color,  are  able  to  live  and 
thrive  -  whoever  reads  Allah’s  statement, 


-Oi 


s*  *>  >  >  S'' 


* >  - 


r>-> 


JGJI 


ovf 


'M  4^5 


* 1 !  Ahmad  4  : 1 30 . 
121  Yr-Razi  2:91. 


157 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Parti} _ 

Our  servant ^  meaning,  Muhammad 

4}jy- t 

ithen  produce  a  Surah  (chapter)}  meaning,  similar  to  what  he 
brought  to  you.  Hence,  if  you  claim  that  what  he  was  sent  with 
did  not  come  from  Allah,  then  produce  something  similar  to 
what  he  has  brought  to  you,  using  the  help  of  anyone  you  wish 
instead  of  Allah.  However,  you  will  not  be  able  to  succeed  in 
this  quest.  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that, 

iyour  witnesses}  means  “Aids.”111  Also,  As-Suddi  reported  that 
Abu  Malik  said  the  Ayah  means,  “Your  partners,  meaning, 
some  other  people  to  help  you  in  that.  Meaning  then  go  and 
seek  the  help  of  your  deities  to  support  and  aid  you.”*2!  Also, 
Mujahid  said  that, 

i^and  call  your  witnesses}  means,  “People,  meaning,  wise  and 
eloquent  men  who  will  provide  the  testimony  that  you  seek.”13, 


The  Challenge 


Allah  challenged  the  disbelievers  in  various  parts  of  the 
Qur’an.  For  instance,  Allah  said  in  Surat  Al-Qasas  (28:49), 


ol 


iSay  (to  them ,  O  Muhammad  "Then  bring  a  Book  from 
Allah,  which  is  a  better  guide  than  these  two  (the  Tawrah 
(Torah)  and  the  Qur'an),  that  I  may  follow  it,  if  you  are 
truthful"}.  Also,  Allah  said  in  Surat  Al-Isrd’  (17:88), 


&  7  ui  jLi  \&  J  $  yij  oO  J} 


iSay:  "If  mankind  and  tlte  Jinn  were  together  to  produce  the 
like  of  this  Qur'an,  they  could  not  produce  the  like  thereof,  even 


111  At-Tabari  1 :376. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :84. 
Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :85 . 


158 


Tafsir  ttm  Kathir 


if  they  helped  one  another."}  Allah  said  in  Surat  Hud 
(11:13), 


ili 


Cr1  y^A*-4  *A*4  />"  l>Li  Ji  f'r 

JL£  o) 


«fOr  they  say,  "He  (Prophet  Muhammad  ■£)  forged  it  (the 
Qur'an)."  Say  :  "Bring  you  then  ten  forged  Siirahs  (chapters)  like 
it,  and  call  whomsoever  you  can,  other  than  Allah  (to  your  help), 
if  you  speak  the  truth!"},  and  in  Surat  Yunus  (10:37-38), 


'Vtf  *//  ^  ✓//  ;<  >  /  >•/  //  /  v 

AjJj  0^.  syOj  C$jUj  jl  03  Uj ^ 

^  lyo\j  *4^  )jj^,  |pti  Ji  ia/if  j>)yb  jJ  oj  <1>2  *-*  S-y  ^ 

/ 1  >  .■■, ,,  ^  ^ ^  # 

V?  oj  ^  pp 


iAnd  this  Qur'an  is  not  such  as  could  ever  be  produced  by 
other  than  Allah  (Lord  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth),  but  it  is  a 
confirmation  of  (the  revelation)  which  was  before  it  (i.e.  the 
Taivrdh,  end  the  Injil),  and  a  full  explanation  of  the  Book  (i.e. 
Laws  decided  for  mankind)  -  wherein  there  is  no  doubt  - 
from  the  Lord  of  all  that  exists.} 

iOr  do  they  say:  "He  (Muhammad  jg)  has  forged  it?"  Say: 
"Bring  then  a  Surah  (chapter)  like  it,  and  call  upon 
whomsoever  you  can  besides  Allah,  if  you  are  truthful!"}.  All 
of  these  Ayat  were  revealed  in  Makkah. 

Allah  also  challenged  the  disbelievers  in  the  Ayat  that  were 
revealed  in  Al-Madlnah.  In  this  Ayah,  Allah  said, 


iyf  4  ^i=»  43^ 


iAttd  if  you  (Arab  pagans,  Jews,  and  Christians)  are  in  Rayb} 
meaning,  doubt. 

£  Qj;  \Lf} 


4 Concerning  that  which  We  have  sent  down  (i.e.  the  Qur’an)  to  Our 
servant}  meaning,  Muhammad  jg, 

4  )jjS 

ithen  produce  a  Surah  (chapter)  the  like  thereof}  meaning,  similar 
to  the  Qur’an.  This  is  the  Tafsir  of  Mujahid,  Qatadah,  Ibn  Jarir 
At-Tabari,  Az-Zamakhshari  and  Ar-Razi.  Ar-Razi  said  that  this 


159 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (1  -  24)  (Parti} 

is  the  Tafsir  of  “Umar,  Ibn  Mas'ud,  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Al-Hasan  Al- 
Basri  and  the  majority  of  the  scholars.  And  he  gave  preference 
to  this  view  and  mentioned  the  fact  that  Allah  has  challenged 
the  disbelievers  as  individuals  and  as  groups,  whether  literate 
or  illiterate,  thus  making  the  challenge  truly  complete.  This 
type  of  challenge  is  more  daring  than  simply  challenging  the 
disbelievers  who  might  not  be  literate  or  knowledgeable.  This  is 
why  Allah  said, 

iBring  you  then  ten  forged  Surahs  (chapters)  like  it }  (11:13), 

and, 


<#*  &  v> 

iThey  could  not  produce  the  like  thereof ^  (17:88). 

Therefore,  this  is  a  general  challenge  to  the  Arab  disbelievers, 
the  most  eloquent  among  all  nations.  Allah  challenged  the 
Arab  disbelievers  both  in  Makkah  and  Al-Madlnah  several 
times,  especially  since  they  had  tremendous  hatred  and 
enmity  for  the  Prophet  and  his  religion.  Yet,  they  were 
unable  to  succeed  in  answering  the  challenge,  and  this  is  why 
Allah  said, 

Jj 

iBut  if  you  do  it  not,  and  you  can  never  do  it},  indicating  that  they 
will  never  be  able  to  answer  the  challenge.  This  is  another 
miracle,  in  that,  Allah  clearly  stated  without  doubt  that  the 
Qur’an  will  never  be  opposed  or  challenged  by  anything  similar  to 
it,  for  eternity.  This  is  a  true  statement  that  has  not  been 
changed  until  the  present  and  shall  never  change.  How  can 
anyone  be  able  to  produce  something  like  the  Qur’an,  when  the 
Qur’an  is  the  Word  of  Allah  Who  created  everything?  How  can  the 
words  of  the  created  ever  be  similar  to  the  Words  of  the  Creator? 


Examples  of  the  Miracle  of  the  Qur'an 


Whoever  reads  through  the  Qur’an  will  realize  that  it 
contains  various  levels  of  superiority  through  both  the 
apparent  and  hidden  meanings  that  it  mentions.  Allah  said, 


160 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kqthir 


iAlif  Lam  Ra.  (This  is)  a  Book,  the  verses  wltereof  are  perfect 
(in  every  sphere  of  knowledge,  etc.),  and  then  explained  in 
detail  from  One  (Allah),  Who  is  Wise  and  well-acquainted  (with 
all  things )}  (11:1) 


So  the  expressions  in  the  Qur’an  are  perfect  and  its 
meanings  are  explained.  Further,  every  word  and  meaning  in 
the  Qur’an  is  eloquent  and  cannot  be  surpassed.  The  Qur’an 
also  mentioned  the  stories  of  the  people  of  the  past;  and  these 
accounts  and  stories  occurred  exactly  as  the  Qur’an  stated. 
Also,  the  Qur’an  commanded  every  type  of  righteousness  and 
forbade  every  type  of  evil,  just  as  Allah  stated, 


4 And  the  Word  of  your  Lord  has  been  fulfilled  in  truth  and  in 
justice »  (6:115). 

meaning,  true  in  the  stories  it  narrates  and  just  in  its  Laws. 

The  Qur’an  is  true,  just  and  full  of  guidance.  It  does  not- — - 
contain  exaggerations,  lies  or  falsehood,  unlike  Arabic  and 
other  types  of  poems  that  contained  lies.  These  poems, 
conform  with  the  popular  statement,  “The  most  eloquent 
speech  is  the  one  that  contains  the  most  lies!”  Sometimes,  one 
would  find  a  long  poem  that  mainly  contains  descriptions  of 
women,  horses  or  alcohol.  Or,  the  poem  might  contain  praise 
or  the  description  of  a  certain  person,  horse,  camel,  war, 
incident,  fear,  lion,  or  other  types  of  items  and  objects.  Such 
praise  or  descriptions  do  not  bring  any  benefit,  except  shed 
light  on  the  poet’s  ability  to  clearly  and  eloquently  describe 
such  items.  Yet,  one  will  only  be  able  to  find  one  or  two 
sentences  in  many  long  poems  that  elaborate  on  the  main 
theme  of  the  poem,  while  the  rest  of  the  poem  contains 
insignificant  descriptions  and  repetitions. 

As  for  the  Qur’an,  it  is  entirely  eloquent  in  the  most  perfect 
manner,  as  those  who  have  knowledge  in  such  matters  and 
understand  Arabic  methods  of  speech  and  expressions  concur. 
When  one  reads  through  the  stories  in  the  Qur’an,  he  will  find 
them  fruitful,  whether  they  were  in  extended  or  short  forms, 
repeated  or  not.  The  more  these  stories  are  repeated,  the  more 
fruitful  and  beautiful  they  become.  The  Qur’an  does  not 
become  old  when  one  repeats  reciting  it,  nor  do  the  scholars 
ever  get  bored  with  it.  When  the  Qur’an  mentions  the  subject 


161 


Surat  2.  AMjgcjgrgh  (1  -  24)  (Part-1) 


of  warning  and  promises,  it  presents  truths  that  would  make 
solid,  firm  mountains  shake,  so  what  about  the 
comprehending,  understanding  hearts?  When  the  Qur’an 
promises,  it  opens  the  hearts  and  the  ears,  making  them  eager 
to  attain  the  abode  of  peace  -  Paradise  -  and  to  be  the 
neighbors  of  the  Throne  of  the  Most  Beneficent.  For  instance, 
on  the  subject  of  promises  and  encouragement,  the  Qur'an 
said, 


iylT  XL>  *£»■  '(}  Ja  p,  2  Jlii  pUi 


4No  person  knoivs  ivhat  is  kept  hidden  for  them  of  joy  as  a 
reward  for  what  they  used  to  do}  (32:17),  and, 


4(There  will  be)  therein  all  that  inner  selves  could  desire,  and 
all  that  eyes  could  delight  in  and  you  will  abide  therein  forever } 
(43:71). 

On  the  subject  of  warning  and  discouragement; 


4Do  you  then  feel  secure  that  He  will  not  cause  a  side  of  the 
land  to  swallow  you  up}  (17:68),  and, 


O'  j  J* 


4Do  you  feel  secure  that  He,  Who  is  over  the  heaven  (Allah),  will 
not  cause  the  earth  to  sink  with  you,  and  then  it  should  quake? 
Or  do  you  feel  secure  that  He,  Wlw  is  over  the  heaven  (Allah), 
will  not  send  against  you  a  violent  whirlwind?  Tlteti  you  shall 
know  how  (terrible)  has  been  My  warning}  (67:16-17). 

On  the  subject  of  threats,  the  Qur’an  said, 


4So  We  punished  each  (of  them)  for  his  sins}  (29:40).  Also,  on 
the  subject  of  soft  advice,  the  Qur’an  said, 


162 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

4Tell  Me,  (even)  if  We  do  let  them  enjoy  for  years.  And 
afterwards  comes  to  them  that  (punishment)  which  they  had 
been  promised.  AU  that  with  which  they  used  to  enjoy  shall  not 
avail  them }  (26:205-207). 

There  are  many  other  examples  of  the  eloquence,  beauty, 
and  benefits  of  the  Qur’an. 

When  the  Qur’an  is  discussing  Laws,  commandments  and 
prohibitions,  it  commands  every  type  of  righteous,  good, 
pleasing  and  beneficial  act.  It  also  forbids  every  type  of  evil, 
disliked  and  amoral  act.  Ibn  Mas'ud  and  other  scholars  of  the 
Salaf  said,  “When  you  hear  what  Allah  said  in  the  Qur’an, 
such  as, 

i\p\: 


40  you  who  believe!},  then  listen  with  full  attention,  for  it  either 
contains  a  type  of  righteousness  that  Allah  is  enjoining,  or  an 
evil  that  He  is  forbidding.”  For  instance,  Allah  said, 


4He  (Muhammad  commands  them  for  Al-Ma'ruf  (i.e. 
Islamic  Monotheism  and  all  that  Islam  has  ordained);  and 
forbids  than  from  Al-Munkar  (i.e.  disbelief,  polytheism  of  all 
kinds,  and  all  that  Islam  has  forbidden) ;  he  allozvs  them  as 
lawful  At-Tayyibdt(i.e.  all  good  and  lazuful  things),  and 
prohibits  them  as  unlawful  Al-Khaba'ith  (i.e.  all  evil  and 
unlawful  things),  he  releases  them  from  their  heavy  burdens 
and  from  the  fetters  (bindings)  that  were  upon  them >  (7:157). 

When  the  Ayat  mention  Resurrection  and  the  horrors  that 
will  occur  on  that  Day,  and  Paradise  and  the  Fire  and  the  joys 
and  safe  refuge  that  Allah  prepared  for  His  loyal  friends,  or 
torment  and  Hell  for  His  enemies,  these  Ayat  contain  glad 
tidings  or  warnings.  The  Ayat  then  call  to  perform  good  deeds 
and  avoid  evil  deeds,  making  the  life  of  this  world  less 
favorable  and  the  Hereafter  more  favorable.  They  also  establish 
the  correct  methods  and  guide  to  Allah’s  straight  path  and 
just  legislation,  all  the  while  ridding  the  hearts  of  the  evil  of 
the  cursed  devil. 


163 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (1  -  24)  (Partill 


The  Qur’an  is  the  Greatest  Miracle  given  to  the  Prophet 


The  Two  Sahihs  record  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  the 
Prophet  said, 


j  i Jl  ^  oUVl  iyt  ^  V!  Ufl 


t*j  U  jS ^  0 ^  ^  jl  4)1  oL>-_jt  Lj>-  j  1  1  0  li" 


“Even/  Prophet  xoas  given  a  miracle,  the  type  of  which  brings 
mankind  to  faith.  What  I  zvas  given  is  a  revelation  that  Allah 
sent  dozen  to  me.  Yet,  l  hope  that  I  zvill  have  the  most 
follozoing  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection.^ 

This  is  the  wording  narrated  by  Muslim.  The  Prophet 
stated  that  among  the  Prophets  he  was  given  a  revelation, 
meaning,  he  was  especially  entrusted  with  the  miraculous 
Qur’an  that  challenged  mankind  to  produce  something  similar 
to  it.  As  for  the  rest  of  the  divinely  revealed  Books,  they  were 
not  miraculous  according  to  many  scholars.  Allah  knows  best. 
The  Prophet  $sg  was  also  aided  with  innumerable  signs  and 
indications  that  testify  to  the  truth  of  his  prophethood  and 
what  he  was  sent  with,  all  thanks  and  praise  is  due  to  Allah. 


Meaning  of  ’Stones’ 

Allah  said, 


$Then  fear  the  Fire  (Hell)  whose  fuel  is  men  and  stones, 
prepared  for  the  disbelievers >  (2:24). 

‘Fuel’  is  wood,  or  similar  substances,  used  to  start  and  feed 
a  fire.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


iAnd  as  for  the  Qasitiin  (disbelievers  who  deviated  hum  the 
right  path),  they  shall  be  fireivood  for  Helty  (72:15),  and, 


■) 


\  v 

lf-j  J U 


111 


Path  Al-Bari  8  :619  and  Muslim  1 :134. 


164 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 

^Certainly  you  (disbelievers)  and  that  which  you  are 
worshipping  noiv  besides  Allah,  are  (but)  fuel  for  Hell!  (Surely) 
you  enter  it.  Had  these  (idols)  been  alihah  (gods),  they  would 
not  have  entered  there  (Hell),  and  all  of  them  will  abide 
therein)  (21:98-99). 

The  stones  mentioned  here  are  the  giant,  rotten,  black, 
sulfuric  stones  that  become  the  hottest  when  heated,  may 
Allah  save  us  from  this  evil  end.  It  was  also  reported  that  the 
stones  mentioned  here  are  the  idols  and  rivals  that  were 
worshipped  instead  of  Allah,  just  as  Allah  said, 

A  "  •< 

-HI*  Uj 

^Certainly  you  (disbelievers)  and  that  which  you  are 
worshipping  now  besides  Allah,  are  (but)  fuel  for  Hell!) 
(21:28). 

Allah’s  statement, 

cjj^) 

^prepared  for  the  disbelievers) 

It  appears  most  obvious  that  it  refers  to  the  Fire  that  is 
fueled  by  men  and  stones,  and  it  also  may  refer  to  the  stones 
themselves.  There  is  no  contradiction  between  these  two  views, 
because  they  are  dependent  upon  each  other.  ‘Prepared’ 
means,  it  is  “kept’  and  will  surely  touch  those  who  disbelieve 
in  Allah  and  His  Messenger  Ibn  Ishaq  narrated  that 
Muhammad  said  that  ‘Ikrimah  or  Said  bin  Jubayr  said  that 
Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 

^)) 

ip  repared  for  the  disbelievers 

"For  those  who  embrace  the  disbelief  that  you  (disbelievers) 
have  embraced/*1 11 

Jahannam  (Hellflre)  exists  now 

Many  of  the  Imams  of  the  Sunnah  used  this  Ayah  to  prove 
that  the  Fire  exists  now.  This  is  because  Allah  said, 


m  At-Tabari  1:383. 


^prepared £  meaning,  prepared  and  kept.  There  are  many 
Hadiths  on  this  subject.  For  instance,  the  Prophet  said, 

* Paradise  and  the  Fire  had  an  argument.  .»(11 

Also,  the  Prophet  jfe  said, 
j,  ^  JSI  j  :cJUj  jdJl 

^ ‘  i.rtll  fr lljJ I 

«77te  Fire  sought  the  permission  of  her  Lord.  She  said,  'O  my 
Lord!  Some  parts  of  me  consumed  the  other  parts.’  And  Allah 
allowed  her  two  periods  to  exhale,  one  in  winter  and  one  in 
summer. d2! 

Also,  there  is  a  Hadith  recorded  from  Ibn  MasMd  that  the 
Companions  heard  the  sound  of  a  falling  object.  When  they 
asked  about  it,  the  Messenger  of  Allah  sfe  said, 

JLo  >-  J. j,.,t  Aj  |Jl»9 

“This  is  a  stone  that  was  thrown  from  the  top  of  Jahannam 
seventy  years  ago,  but  only  now  reached  its  bottom .»  This 
Hadith  is  in  Sahih  Muslim .  ,3) 

There  are  many  Hadiths  that  are  Mutawatir  (narrated  by 
many  different  chains  of  narrations)  on  this  subject,  such  as 
the  Hadiths  about  the  eclipse  prayer,  the  night  of  Isra'  etc. 

Allah’s  statements, 

(j “*  ‘JUrl 

iThen  produce  a  Surah  ( chapter )  of  the  like  thereof^  (2:23),  and, 

4A  Surah  (chapter)  like  ify  (10:38)  this  includes  the  short  and 
long  Surahs  of  the  Qur’an.  Therefore,  the  challenge  to  creation 
stands  with  regards  to  both  the  long  and  short  Surahs,  and 

Muslim  4 :2186. 

121  Al-Bukhari  no.  527,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  7 :317 . 

Muslim  4  :2184. 


166 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


there 


is  no 


disagreement  that  I 
'  '  ^ .  •'  '  '  *cnow  °*  on  this  fact 

between  the  scholars 
*Ts  ">  \'i.  >  .  -Yu'  '  of  old  and  new.  Before 

he  became  Muslim, 
‘Amr  bin  Al-‘As  met 

,  •'  \  - vt/fs.iA.  Musaylimah  the  Liar 

who  asked  him, 
“What  has  recently 
C.,  *  ^  ,  '  ‘"‘isi  .*  been  revealed  to  your 

fellow  (meaning 

%*..  .*L^5s<34.  “u,b,am“fd,.  •  ‘n 

Makkah?  Amr  said, 
^  “A  short,  yet  eloquent 

>'7'A\'<  >&"  ,-l" ;.f  Surah.”  He  asked, 
L  Oi  *»'  “What  is  it?”  He  said, 


j  gap 

4%  Al-'Asr  (the  time). 

uotfi’-T" is  tes> 

Musaylimah 

1_  "  _ . .  .  J1  thought  for  a  while 

and  said,  “A  similar  Surah  was  also  revealed  to  me.”  ‘Amr 
asked,  “What  is  it?”  He  said,  “O  Wabr,  O  Wabr  (i.e.  a  wild  cat), 
you  are  but  two  ears  and  a  chest,  and  the  rest  of  you  is 
unworthy  and  thin.”  ‘Amr  said,  “By  Allah!  You  know  that  1 
know  that  you  are  lying.” 

LhU  j^sVf  0. «  jg  p,  3  !£fc 

L^-l.'Lul  ijjlj  0}  Lijj  ufjjf  lii  ijlli  Ujj  }j*~>  tJL  iyjj 

4  '■  's  [L»j  £l*j3 


^25.  And  give  glad  tidings  to  those  who  believe  and  do 
righteous  good  deeds,  that  for  them  will  be  Gardens  under 
which  rivers  flow  (Paradise).  Every  time  they  will  be  provided 
with  a  fruit  therefrom,  they  will  say:  '‘This  is  what  we  were 
provided  with  before ,”  and  they  will  be  given  things  in 


167 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Part-1) 

resemblance  (i.e.  in  the  same  form  but  different  in  taste)  and 
they  shall  have  therein  Azwdjun  Mutahharatun  (purified  mates 
or  ivives),  and  they  will  abide  therein  forever  .} 


Rewards  of  Righteous  Believers 


After  mentioning  the  torment  that  Allah  has  prepared  for  His 
miserable  enemies  who  disbelieve  in  Him  and  in  His 
Messengers,  He  mentions  the  condition  of  His  happy,  loyal 
friends  who  believe  in  Him  and  in  His  Messengers,  adhere  to 
the  faith  and  perform  the  good  deeds.  This  is  the  reason  why 
the  Qur’an  was  called  Mathani,  based  on  the  correct  opinion  of 
the  scholars.  We  will  elaborate  upon  this  subject  later. 
Mathani  means  to  mention  faith  and  then  disbelief,  or  vice 
versa.  Or,  Allah  mentions  the  miserable  and  then  the  happy, 
or  vice  versa.  As  for  mentioning  similar  things,  it  is  called 
Tashabbuh,  as  we  will  come  to  know,  Allah  willing.  Allah  said, 


iAnd  give  glad  tidings  to  those  who  believe  and  do  righteous  good 
deeds,  that  for  them  zvill  be  Gardens  under  which  rivers  flow 
(Paradise)}.  Consequently,  Allah  stated  that  Paradise  has  rivers 
that  run  beneath  it,  meaning,  underneath  its  trees  and  rooms. 
From  Hadiths  it  is  learned  that  the  rivers  of  Paradise  do  not 
run  in  valleys,  and  that  the  banks  of  Al-Kawthar  (the  Prophet’s 
lake  in  Paradise)  are  made  of  domes  of  hollow  pearls,  the  sand 
of  Paradise  is  made  of  scented  musk  while  its  stones  are  made 
from  pearls  and  jewels.  We  ask  Allah  to  grant  Paradise  to  us, 
for  verily,  He  is  the  Most  Beneficent,  Most  Gracious. 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  reported  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  said, 

•4LLJ1  JGr  ja  j\  d'fo  j\£\t 


‘The  rivers  of  Paradise  spring  from  beneath  hills,  or  mountains 
of  musfc.s11' 

He  also  reported  from  Masruq  that  ‘Abdullah  said,  “The 
rivers  of  Paradise  spring  from  beneath  mountains  of  musk. 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :87. 
Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :88 . 


168 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


The  similarity  between  the  Fruits  of  Paradise 

Allah  said  next, 

4  Iji  ijlli  \ijj  j*  [f,  iyjj  Li£=»^ 


iEvenj  time  they  will  be  provided  with  a  fruit  therefrom,  they 
will  say:  "This  is  what  we  were  provided  with  before"}. 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  reported  that  Yahya  bin  Abi  Kathir  said,  “The 
grass  of  Paradise  is  made  of  saffron,  its  hills  from  musk  and 
the  boys  of  everlasting  youth  will  serve  the  believers  with  fruits 
which  they  will  eat.  They  will  then  be  brought  similar  fruits, 
and  the  people  of  Paradise  will  comment,  This  is  the  same  as 
what  you  have  just  brought  us.’  The  boys  will  say  to  them, 
“Eat,  for  the  color  is  the  same,  but  the  taste  is  different.  Hence 
Allah’s  statement, 

4  .f,  \ji\j} 


iand  they  will  be  given  things  in  resemblance}.^  Abu  JaYar  Ar- 
Razi  narrated  that  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  said  that  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah 
said  that, 


iand  they  will  be  given  things  in  resemblance}  means,  “They  look 
like  each  other,  but  the  taste  is  different.”12'  Also,  Ikrimah 
said, 


iand  they  will  be  given  things  in  resemblance}  “They  are  similar  to 
the  fruits  of  this  life,  but  the  fruits  of  Paradise  taste  better.  ”*3' 
Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  reported  from  Al-A‘mash,  from  Abu 
Thubyan,  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Nothing  in  Paradise  resembles 
anything  in  the  life  of  this  world,  except  in  name.”  In  another 
narration,  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Only  the  names  are  similar 
between  what  is  in  this  life  and  what  is  in  Paradise.”*4’ 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :90 
,2)  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :90 
131  At-Tabari  1 :391. 

[4'  At-Tabari  1 :392 . 


369 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Part-1) 


The  Wives  of  the  People  of  Paradise  are  Pure 

Allah  said, 

iattd  they  shall  have  therein  Azwdjun  Mutahharatun Ibn  Abi 
Talhah  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Purified  from  filth  and 
impurity.”11'  Also,  Mujahid  said,  “From  menstruation,  relieving 
the  call  of  nature,  urine,  spit,  semen  and  pregnancies.”12'  Also, 
Qatadah  said,  “Purified  from  impurity  and  sin.”  In  another 
narration,  he  said,  “From  menstruation  and  pregnancies.”'3' 
Further,  ‘Ata’,  Al-Hasan,  Ad-Dahhak,  Abu  Salih,  ‘Atiyah  and 
As-Suddi  were  reported  to  have  said  similarly.'4' 

Allah’s  statement, 


iand  they  will  abide  therein  forever >  meaning  ultimate  happiness, 
for  the  believers  will  enjoy  everlasting  delight,  safe  from  death 
and  disruption  of  their  bliss,  for  it  never  ends  or  ceases.  We  ask 
Allah  to  make  us  among  these  believers,  for  He  is  the  Most 
Generous,  Most  Kind  and  Most  merciful. 


\Js\:  Cfe  Cc^>  Cj  u  J 

S.J*  J — \) jA  <joiK  ^ 

L*  if  -Lji-  by&-.  CfcA*  Oli-— iil'  "jj  J-^4  Vij  *4_>  Ia-^3 

pi  — ^  oyi-jy  Vi  oyJiuj  .«  jiu 


426.  Verily,  Allah  is  not  ashamed  to  set  forth  a  parable  even  of 
a  mosquito  or  so  much  more  when  it  is  bigger  (or  less  when  it 
is  smaller)  than  it.  And  as  for  those  who  believe,  they  know 
that  it  is  the  truth  from  their  Lord,  but  as  for  those  who 
disbelieve,  they  say :  "What  did  Allah  intend  by  this  parable?” 
By  it  He  misleads  many,  and  many  He  guides  thereby.  And  He 
misleads  thereby  only  the  Fasiqm  (the  rebellious,  disobedient  to 


111  At-Tabari  1 :295. 

121  At-Tabari  1 :396. 

'3'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:91. 
141  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :92 . 


1ZQ - - -  - _ Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

Allah ). 

427 .  Those  who  break  Allah's  covenant  after  ratifying  it,  and 
sever  what  Allah  has  ordered  to  be  joined  and  do  mischief  on 
earth,  it  is  they  who  are  the  losers .) 

In  his  Tafsir,  As-Suddi  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Ibn  Mas*ud, 
and  some  Companions  said;  “When  Allah  gave  these  two 
examples  of  the  hypocrites”  meaning  Allah’s  statements, 

4#  ft 

iTheir  likeness  is  as  the  likeness  of  one  who  kindled  a  fire), 
and, 


im  ■}) 


40r  like  a  rainstorm  from  the  sky),  “The  hypocrites  said,  ‘Allah’s 
far  more  exalted  than  for  Him  to  make  such  examples.’  So 
Allah  revealed  these  Ayat  (2:26-27)  up  to: 


4Wlw  are  the  losers >”.m  Said  said  that  Qatadah  said,  “Allah 
does  not  shy  away  from  the  truth  when  He  mentions  a  matter 
as  a  parable,  whether  this  matter  is  significant  or  not.  When 
Allah  mentioned  the  flies  and  the  spider  in  His  Book,  the  people 
of  misguidance  said,  Why  did  Allah  mention  these  things.’  So 
Allah  revealed; 


/f  f.  *  >'  s'  ;  v 


4Verily,  Allah  is  not  ashamed  to  set  forth  a  parable  even  of  a 
mosquito  or  so  much  more  when  it  is  bigger  (or  less  when  it  is 
stnaller)  than  it).’^ 


A  Parable  about  the  Life  of  This  World 

Abu  Ja'far  Ar-Razi  reported  that  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas 
commented  on  this  Ayah  (2:26);  “This  is  an  example  that  Allah 
has  given  for  the  life  of  this  world.  The  mosquito  lives  as  long 
as  it  needs  food,  but  when  it  gets  fat,  it  dies.  This  is  also  the 
example  of  people  whom  Allah  mentioned  in  the  Qur’an:  when 


1,1  At-Tabari  1 :398. 
|2)  At-Tabari  1 :399. 


271 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Part-1) 


they  acquire  (and  collect  the  delights  oi)  the  life  of  this  world, 
Allah  then  takes  them  away.”  Afterwards,  he  recited. 


4».  ’*■  j-Q*  i*  !»-* 


4 So,  when  they  forgot  (the  warning)  with  which  they  had  been 
reminded,  We  opened  for  them  the  gates  of  every  (pleasant) 
thing »  (6:44)' 11 

In  this  Ayah  (2:26)  Allah  stated  that  He  does  not  shy  away 
or  hesitate  in  making  an  example  or  parable  of  anything, 
whether  the  example  involves  a  significant  or  an  insignificant 
matter. 

Allah’s  statement, 


40r  so  much  more  when  it  is  bigger  than  ify  Fama  fawqaha 
means,  something  bigger  than  the  mosquito,  which  is  one  of 
the  most  insignificant  and  tiniest  of  creatures.  Muslim  narrated 
that  Aishah  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  said, 


Li,  Alp  cIxaj  kA>-jA  Ifc  AJ  S  i  J*  J--  dulj  *1— *  La* 

A  . 

«A*Jasl 


«No  Mms/ijm  is  harmed  by  a  thorn,  Fatnd  fawqaha  (or 
something  larger),  but  a  good  deed  will  be  written  for  him  and 
an  evil  deed  will  be  erased  from  his  record. »|2* 


So  Allah  has  informed  us  that  there  is  no  matter  that  is  too 
small  that  is  exempt  from  being  used  as  an  example,  even  if  it 
was  as  insignificant  as  a  mosquito  or  a  spider.  Allah  said, 


j  aI>(  oja  at 

4jlX!' 


uii  oja  oi  -c-yu*  cojjj'  -ioj;  mj 

3  till-  W  [>K*~  *?*  JrJ  ^ r ** 


40  mankind !  A  similihide  has  been  coined,  so  listen  to  it 
(carefully):  Verily,  those  on  whom  you  call  besides  Allah, 
cannot  create  (even)  a  fly,  even  though  they  combine  together 
for  the  purpose.  And  if  the  fly  snatches  away  a  thing  from 


111  At-Jabari  1 :398. 
121  Muslim  4:1991. 


172 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


them,  they  will  have  no  power  to  release  it  from  the  fly.  So 
weak  are  (both)  the  seeker  and  the  sought .)  (22:73), 


£4  ojj  U*  JIT  if  ^  ^  t/jjlf  ^jjf 

jj  ^  ^ 


<77ie  likeness  of  those  wlw  take  (false  deities  as)  Awliyd’ 
(protectors,  helpers)  other  than  Allah  is  the  likeness  of  a  spider 
who  builds  (for  itself)  a  house;  but  verily,  the  frailest  (weakest) 
of  houses  is  the  spider's  house  -  if  they  but  knew >  (29:41), 
and, 


4  '-f tb  b zz-4*  0^  f 

ojllu  jl2.V>  ill  -4-i^j  OJ  1*14=1  oj;  •  sQ*E£^l> 

j;  ^  L?iVf  jji  ot  oij-f  iO.  jjL.j 

j-*£  j  gjsfij  oji  ft  ££ 

4-7^‘1-“i  l*  i*1'  OJjLkJI  ilf 


iSee  you  not  hoiv  Allah  sets  forth  a  parable?  A  goodly  word  as 
a  goodly  tree,  whose  root  is  firmly  fixed,  and  its  branches 
(reach)  to  the  sky  (i.e.  very  high).  Giving  its  fruit  at  all  times, 
by  the  leave  of  its  Lord,  and  Allah  sets  forth  parables  for 
mankind  in  order  that  they  may  remember.  And  the  parable  of 
an  evil  word  is  that  of  an  evil  tree  uprooted  from  the  surface  of 
earth,  having  no  stability.  Allah  will  keep  firm  those  who 
beVeve,  with  the  word  that  stands  firm  in  life  of  this  world  (i.e. 
they  will  keep  on  worshipping  Allah  alone  and  none  else),  and 
in  the  Hereafter.  And  Allah  will  cause  tire  Zdlimtn  (polytheists 
and  zorongdoers)  to  go  astray  those  and  Allah  does  what  He 
wills.)  (14:24-27).  Allah  said, 


40  &  JO.  V  tp,  lj£  Xu  if  iff.) 


iAllah  puts  forward  the  example  of  (two  men  —  a  believer  and 
a  disbeliever) ;  a  servant  under  the  possession  of  another,  he  has 
no  power  of  any  sort)  (16:75).  He  then  said, 


&  Ji-  %  O  £  JO.  V  ^4  tL&J  cJU-j  &  if  iffif) 
4401  O  >  OO  >  O  v  U4.  Of 


173 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Part-1) 


4And  Allah  puts  forward  (another)  example  of  two  men,  one  of 
them  dumb,  who  has  no  power  over  anything,  and  he  is  a 
burden  on  his  master;  whicliever  way  he  directs  him,  he  brings 
no  good.  Is  such  a  man  equal  to  one  who  commands  justice ?} 
(16:76).  Also,  Allah  said, 


C  4  ; ^  12  «  P  ji  lit 

d'k-'i'.: 


4 He  sets  forth  for  you  a  parable  from  your  own  selves :  Do  you 
have  partners  among  those  whom  your  right  hands  possess  (i.e. 
your  servants)  to  share  as  equals  in  the  wealth  we  have 
bestowed  on  you?}  (30:28). 

Mujahid  commented  on  Allah’s  statement, 


4Verily,  Allah  is  not  ashamed  to  set  forth  a  parable  even  of  a 
mosquito  or  so  much  more  when  it  is  bigger  than  it.} 

“The  believers  believe  in  these  parables,  whether  they  involve 
large  matters  or  small,  because  they  know  that  they  are  the 
truth  from  their  Lord,  and  Allah  guides  the  believers  by  these 
parables. 

In  his  Tafslr,  As-Suddi  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Ibn  Mas'ud 
and  other  people  among  the  Companions  said, 

4!^=*  -H 


4By  it  He  misleads  many},  “Meaning  the  hypocrites.  Allah  guides 
the  believers  with  these  parables,  and  the  straying  of  the 
hypocrites  increases  when  they  reject  the  parables  that  Allah 
mentioned  for  them  which  they  know  are  true.  This  is  how 
Allah  misleads  them.”121 

4And  He  guides  thereby}  meaning,  with  the  parables, 


4many}  from  among  the  people  of  faith  and  conviction.  Allah 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :93. 
121  At-Tabari  1  :408. 


274 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

adds  guidance  to  their  guidance,  and  faith  to  their  faith, 
because  they  firmly  believe  in  what  they  know  to  be  true,  that 
is,  the  parables  that  Allah  has  mentioned.  This  is  guidance  that 
Allah  grants  them; 

.’ji'  j-J 


iAtid  He  misleads  thereby  only  the  Fasiqin  (the  rebellious,  disobedient 
to  Allah)},  meaning,  the  hypocrites.  The  Arabs  say  that  the  date 
has  Fasaqat,  when  it  comes  out  of  its  skin,  and  they  call  the 
mouse  a  Fuwaysiqah,  because  it  leaves  its  den  to  cause 
mischief.  The  Two  Sahihs  recorded  ‘A’ishah  saying  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  said, 


JjJl 


“ Five  animals  are  Fawasiq,  and  they  must  be  killed  during 
Ihram  and  otherwise:  the  crow,  the  kite,  the  scorpion,  the 
mouse  and  the  rabid  dog .  »• 1 1 

Fasiq,  includes  the  disbeliever  and  the  disobedient.  However, 
the  Fisq  of  the  disbeliever  is  worse,  and  this  is  the  type  of 
Fasiq  that  the  Ayah  is  describing  here,  because  Allah 
described  them  as, 


J *>ym 


IJU  All 


'if  'A  t 


rM  ie  J-je-  bjbaJC,  iij&fy 

£  Jiiji  ^Vf  4 


iThose  who  break  Allah’s  covenant  after  ratifying  it,  and  sever 
what  Allah  has  ordered  to  be  joined  and  do  mischief  on  earth,  it 
is  they  who  are  the  losers .} 

These  are  the  characteristics  of  the  disbelievers  and  they 
contradict  the  qualities  of  the  believers.  Similarly,  Allah  said  in 
Surat  Ar-Ra‘d, 


Ot#  ji  icj  ^  $  t3  & 


m 


Fath  Al-Bari  6 :408  and  Muslim  2  :856. 


175 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Partll 

iShall  he  then,  who  knows  that  wlmt  has  been  revealed  unto 
you  (O  Muhammad  jg)  from  your  Lord  is  the  truth,  be  like 
him  who  is  blind?  But  it  is  only  the  men  of  understanding  that 
pay  heed.  Those  who  fulfill  the  covenant  of  Allah  and  break  not 
the  Mithaq  (bond,  treaty,  covenant).  And  those  who  join  that 
which  Alldh  has  commanded  to  be  joined  (i.e.  they  are  good  to 
their  relatives  and  do  not  sever  the  bond  of  kinship),  and  fear 
their  Lord,  and  dread  the  terrible  reckoning.}  (13:19-21)^ 
until, 


^  ujA-Juj  o’  z**  ^  **£-*i*  o*  j 

fi.  Jbij'  ^:V> 


4 And  those  zoho  break  the  covenant  of  Allah,  after  its 
ratification,  and  sever  that  which  Allah  has  commanded  to  be 
joined  (i.e.  they  sever  the  bond  of  kinship  and  are  not  good  to 
their  relatives),  and  work  mischief  in  the  land,  on  them  is  the 
curse  (i.e.  they  will  be  far  away  from  Allah's  mercy),  and  for 
them  is  the  unlwppy  (evil)  home  (i.e.  Hell).}  (13:25) 

The  covenant  that  these  deviant  people  broke  is  Allah’s 
covenant  with  His  creation,  that  is,  to  obey  Him  and  avoid  the 
sins  that  He  prohibited.  This  covenant  was  reiterated  in  Allah’s 
Books  and  by  the  words  of  His  Messengers.  Ignoring  this 
covenant  constitutes  breaking  it. 

It  was  said  that  the  Ayah  (2:27)  is  about  the  disbelievers  and 
the  hypocrites  among  the  People  of  the  Book.  In  this  case,  the 
covenant  that  they  broke  is  the  pledge  that  Allah  took  from 
them  in  the  Tawrah  to  follow  Muhammad  sg  when  he  is  sent 
as  a  Prophet,  and  to  believe  in  him,  and  in  what  he  was  sent 
with.  Breaking  Allah’s  covenant  in  this  case  occured  when  the 
People  of  the  Book  rejected  the  Prophet  jg  after  they  knew  the 
truth  about  him,  and  they  hid  this  truth  from  people,  even 
though  they  swore  to  Allah  that  they  would  do  otherwise.  Allah 
informed  us  that  they  threw  the  covenant  behind  their  backs 
and  sold  it  for  a  miserable  price. 

It  was  also  reported  that  the  Ayah  (2:27)  refers  to  all 
disbelievers,  idol  worshippers  and  hypocrites.  Allah  took  their 
pledge  to  believe  in  His  Oneness,  showing  them  the  signs  that 
testify  to  His  Lordship.  He  also  took  a  covenant  from  them  to 
obey  His  commands  and  refrain  from  His  prohibitions, 


176 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 

knowing  that  His  Messengers  would  bring  proofs  and  miracles 
that  none  among  the  creation  could  ever  produce.  These 
miracles  testified  to  the  truth  of  Allah’s  Messengers.  The 
covenant  was  broken  when  the  disbelievers  denied  what  was 
proven  to  them  to  be  authentic  and  rejected  Allah’s  Prophets 
and  Books,  although  they  knew  that  they  were  the  truth.  This 
Tafsir  was  reported  from  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan,  and  it  is  very 
good.  It  is  also  the  view  that  Az-Zamakhshari  held. 

Allah’s  statement  next, 

o'  ‘ti  t 


iAnd  sever  what  Allah  has  ordered  to  be  joined } 

is  in  reference  to  keeping  the  relations  with  the  relatives,  as 
Qatadah  asserted.  This  Ayah  is  similar  to  Allah’s  statement, 

j  b->— J  j!  j. 


iWould  you  then,  if  you  were  given  the  authority,  do  mischief 
in  the  land,  and  sever  your  ties  of  kinship?}  (47:22)m 

Ibn  Jarir  At-Tabari  preferred  this  opinion.  However,  it  has 
been  said  that  the  meaning  of  the  Ayah  (2:27)  here  is  more 
general.  Hence,  everything  that  Allah  has  commanded  to 
nurture,  and  the  people  severed,  is  included  in  its  meaning. 


The  Meaning  of  ‘Loss’ 

Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  commented  on  Allah’s  statement, 

ilt  is  they  ivho  are  the  losers }  “In  the  Hereafter.’’121  Similarly, 
Allah  said, 

iOn  them  is  the  curse  (i.e.  they  will  be  far  away  from  Allah's 
mercy),  and  for  them  is  the  unhappy  (evil)  home  (i.e.  Hell)} 
(13:25). 

Also,  Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Every 
characteristic  that  Allah  describes  those  other  than  the  people 
of  Islam  -  such  as  being  losers  -  then  it  refers  to  disbelief. 


***  At-Tabari  1  :416. 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:101 


277 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (25  -49)  ( Partll 


However,  when  they  are  attributed  to  the  people  of  Islam,  then 
these  terms  refer  to  sin.”111  Ibn  Jarir  commented  on  Allah’s 
statement, 


41 1  is  they  who  are  the  losers,} 


“Losers  is  plural  for  loser,  this  word  refers  to  whoever 
decreased  his  own  share  of  Allah’s  mercy  by  disobeying  Him, 
just  as  the  merchant  loses  in  his  trade  by  sustaining  capital 
loss.  Such  is  the  case  with  the  hypocrite  and  the  disbeliever 
who  lose  their  share  of  the  mercy  that  Allah  has  in  store  for 
His  servants  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection.  And  that  is  when  the 
disbeliever  and  the  hypocrite  most  desperately  need  Allah’s 
mercy.”121 


S' 


428.  Hoio  can  you  disbelieve  in  Allah  seeing  that  you  were 
dead  and  He  gave  you  life?  Then  He  will  give  you  death,  then 
again  will  bring  you  to  life  (on  the  Day  of  Resurrection)  and 
then  unto  Him  you  will  return .} 

Allah  testifies  to  the  fact  that  He  exists  and  that  He  is  the 
Creator  and  the  Sustainer  Who  has  full  authority  over  His 
servants, 


4How  can  you  disbelieve  in  Allah?} 

How  can  anyone  deny  Allah’s  existence  or  worship  others 
with  Him  while; 


4You  were  dead  and  He  gave  you  life}  meaning,  He  brought  them 
from  the  state  of  non-existence  to  life.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


111  At-Tabari  1 :417. 
121  Ibid. 


178 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathk 


iWere  they  created  by  nothing?  Or  were  they  themselves  the 
creators?  Or  did  they  create  tlte  heavens  and  the  earth?  Nay, 
but  they  have  no  firm  belief}  (52:35-36)  and, 


a « cw  ±4  $  3  ji> 


iHas  there  not  been  over  man  a  period  of  time,  when  he  was 
not  a  thing  worth  mentioning ?}  (76:1). 


There  are  many  other  Ayat  on  this  subject.  Ibn  Jarir 
reported  from  ‘Ata’  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that, 


iSeeing  that  you  were  dead  and  He  gave  you  life}  means,  “You  did 
not  exist  beforehand.  You  were  nothing  until  Allah  created  you; 
He  will  bring  death  to  you  and  then  bring  you  back  to  life 
during  Resurrection.”  Ibn  ‘Abbas  then  said,  “This  is  similar  to 
Allah’s  statement; 


% 


iThey  will  say:  " Our  Lord!  You  have  made  us  to  die  twice  and 
You  have  given  us  life  twice."}  (40:1 1)”1*1 


er 


4  jii*  ifi  ->*-> 


429.  He  it  is  Who  created  for  you  all  that  is  on  earth.  Then  He 
Istawa  ila  the  heaven  and  made  them  seven  heavens  and  He  is 
the  Knower  of  every  thing .} 


Evidence  of  Allah’s  Ability 


After  Allah  mentioned  the  proofs  of  His  creating  them,  and 
what  they  can  witness  in  themselves  as  proof  of  that,  He 
mentioned  another  proof  that  they  can  witness,  that  is,  the 
creation  of  the  heavens  and  earth.  Allah  said, 


(p  &JA  P  dfji'  j  U  y*} 

xyy- 


4He  it  is  Who  created  for  you  all  that  is  on  earth .  Then  He  Istawa  ild 
the  heaven  and  made  them  seven  heavens ^  meaning,  He  turned 


At-Jabari  1 :419. 


179 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarali  (25  -  49)  (Part-1) 
towards  the  heaven,  , , 


4  And  made  them$  meaning,  that  He  made  the  heaven,  seven 
heavens.  Allah  said, 


4And  made  them  seven  heavens  and  He  is  the  Knower  of  everything} 
meaning,  His  knowledge  encompasses  all  His  creation,  just  as 
He  said  in  another  Ayah , 


A&  £  p. 

iShould  not  He  Who  has  created  knou>?$  (67:14). 


The  Beginning  of  the  Creation 

This  Ayah  (2:29)  is  explained  in  detail  in  Surat  As-Sajdah 
where  Allah  said; 


Z>J  liB'i  IjlJ  ,4  J  J*jj\  jU.  iJjji 

Vi  -4rO  jj 

bJli  \ff  jt  WjL  lii'  li  J'V  ^  I 

Gjli  iL_Uf  Cjjj  .d  j  uyjj  4  y>l»d  j+Uiui 


4.” jwii  iilj’j  ^ I :..i 


4Sfli/  (O  Muhammad  jg):  "Do  i/om  verily  disbelieve  in  Him 
Who  created  the  earth  in  two  Days?  And  you  set  up  rivals  (in 
worship)  with  Him?  That  is  the  Lord  of  all  that  exists.  He 
placed  therein  (i.e.  the  earth)  firm  mountains  from  above  it,  and 
He  blessed  it,  and  measured  therein  its  sustenance  (for  its 
dwellers)  in  four  Days  equal  (i.e.  all  these  four  ‘days'  were 
equal  in  the  length  of  time)  for  all  those  who  ask  (about  its 
creation).  Then  He  Istaioa  ild  the  heaven  when  it  ivas  smoke, 
and  said  to  it  and  to  the  earth:  "Come  both  of  you  willingly  or 
unwillingly."  They  both  said:  "We  come  willingly."  Then  He 
finished  them  (as)  seveti  heavens  in  two  Days  and  He  made  in 
each  heaven  its  affair.  And  We  adorned  the  nearest  (lowest) 
heaven  with  lamps  (stars)  to  be  an  adornment  as  well  as  to 
guard  (from  the  devils  by  using  them  as  missiles  against  the 
devils).  Such  is  the  decree  of  the  Almighty,  the  Knower}  (41:9- 
12). 


180 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kgthir 


These  Ayat  indicate  that  Allah  started  creation  by  creating 
earth,  then  He  made  heaven  into  seven  heavens.  This  is  how 
building  usually  starts,  with  the  lower  floors  first  and  then  the 
top  floors,  as  the  scholars  of  Tafsir  reiterated,  as  we  will  come 
to  know,  Allah  willing.  Allah  also  said, 


£3$  *4^  Cj4>  PX 

£3 


hs  j  tit  lit 


iAre  you  more  difficult  to  create  or  is  the  heaven  that  He 
constructed?  He  raised  its  height,  and  has  perfected  it.  Its  night 
He  covers  with  darkness  and  its  forenoon  He  brings  out  (with 
light).  And  the  earth,  after  that,  He  spread  it  out.  And  brought 
forth  therefrom  its  water  and  its  pasture.  And  the  mountains 
He  has  fixed  firmly.  (To  be)  a  provision  and  benefit  for  you  and 
your  cattle)  (79:27-33). 

It  is  said  that  “Then”  in  the  Ayah  (2:29)  relates  only  to  the 
order  of  reciting  the  information  being  given,  it  does  not  relate 
to  the  order  that  the  events  being  mentioned  took  place,  this 
was  reported  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas  by  ‘Ali  bin  Abi  Talhah.*1* 


The  Earth  was  created  before  Heaven 

Mujahid  commented  on  Allah’s  statement, 

4  \s  p  X) 

4He  it  is  Who  created  for  you  all  that  is  on  earth) 

“Allah  created  the  earth  before  heaven,  and  when  He  created 
the  earth,  smoke  burst  out  of  it.  This  is  why  Allah  said, 

Alt*  \  -isp\  '-ft 

ATheti  He  Istawd  ild  (turned  towards)  the  heaven  what  it  was 
smoke.)  (41:11) 

)And  made  them  seven  heavens)  means,  one  above  the  other, 
while  the  ‘seven  earths’  means,  one  below  the  other.”*2' 


111  At-Tabari  1 :437. 
*2*  At-Tabari  1 :436 . 


181 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Part-1) 


This  Ayah  testifies 
to  the  fact  that  the 
earth  was  created 
before  heaven,  as 
Allah  has  indicated  in 
the  Ayat  in  Surat  As- 
Sajdah. 

Spreading  the 
Earth  out  after  the 
Heavens  were 
created 

Sahih  Al-Bukhari 
records  that  when 
Ibn  ‘Abbas  was 
question  about  this 
matter,  he  said  that 
the  earth  was  created 
before  heaven,  and 
the  earth  was  spread 
out  only  after  the 
creation  of  the 
heaven. ^  Several 
Tafsir  scholars  of  old 
and  recent  times  also 
said  similarly,  as  we 
have  elaborated  on  in  the  Tafsir  of  Surat  An-Nazi‘at  (chapter 
79).  The  result  of  that  discussion  is  that  the  word  Daha. 
(translated  above  as  “spread”)  is  mentioned  and  explained  in 
Allah’s  statement, 


Jj  mm  i  ] asuisu  ^ 

1  dlili J  1^-3  1'Q 

•  h*(\  >  Y->'  1 


ijl  S  ^  jlii 

' i  jjj  ^  o SjjJ 
(|»$  tjcl  ijillh  JCa  j  ,jjC 

£  jit  jjiis 


^  rT •  3lA(»  ,rS  |»£  JUJ  ^yjV 4 


4  And  the  earth,  after  that,  He  spread  it  out.  And  brought  forth 
therefrom  its  water  and  its  pasture.  And  the  mountains  He  has 
fixed  firmly  >  (79:30-32) 

Therefore,  Daha  means  that  the  earth’s  treasures  were 
brought  to  its  surface  after  finishing  the  job  of  creating 

m 


Path  Al-Bari  8:417. 


182 


Tgfsir  Ibti  Kgtlur 


whatever  will  reside  on  earth  and  heaven.  When  the  earth 
became  Daha,  the  water  burst  out  to  its  surface  and  the 
various  types,  colors,  shapes  and  kinds  of  plants  grew.  The 
stars  started  rotating  along  with  the  planets  that  rotate 
around  them.  And  Allah  knows  best. 


jL-oj  Ljj  4  4)  fSifLii  Jtt 

4  Ju  es  J-£j 


430.  And  (remember)  when  your  Lord  said  to  the  angels: 
" Verily ,  I  am  going  to  place  (mankind)  generations  after 
generations  on  earth."  They  said:  " Will  You  place  therein  those 
who  will  make  mischief  therein  and  shed  blood,  -  while  we 
glorify  You  with  praises  and  thanks  and  sanctify  You."  He 
(Allah)  said:  "I  know  that  which  you  do  not  know."} 


Adam  and  His  Children  inhabited  the  Earth,  Generation 
after  Generation 

Allah  reiterated  His  favor  on  the  Children  of  Adam  when  He 
stated  that  He  mentioned  them  in  the  highest  of  heights  before 
He  created  them.  Allah  said, 

4^0  jli  ijj^ 

4 And  (remember)  when  your  Lord  said  to  the  angels. $ 

This  Ayah  means,  “O  Muhammad  sg!  Mention  to  your  people 
what  Allah  said  to  the  angels, 

iVerily,  I  am  going  to  place  a  Khalifah  on  earth}. 

Meaning  people  reproducing  generation  after  generation, 
century  after  century,  just  as  Allah  said, 

id0  %} 

4 And  it  is  He  Who  has  made  you  (Khald’if)  generations  coming 
after  generations,  replacing  each  other  on  the  earth}  (6:165), 

4^’f  '{U^j} 

4And  makes  you  (Khulafd')  inheritors  of  the  earth}  (27:62), 
4s>&  4  iCS  &} 


183 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Portal} 

AAnd  if  it  were  Our  will,  We  would  have  (destroyed  you 
(mankind  all,  and)  made  angels  to  replace  you  (Yakhlufun)  on 
the  earth >  (43:60)  and, 

^  J&} 

iThen  after  them  succeeded  an  (evil)  generation  (Khalf)} 
(7:169). 

It  appears  that  Allah  was  not  refering  to  Adam  specifically  as 
Khalifah,  otherwise  he  would  not  have  allowed  the  angels’ 
statement, 

iWill  You  place  therein  those  who  will  make  mischief  therein 
and  shed  blood}. 

The  angels  meant  that  this  type  of  creature  usually  commits 
the  atrocities  they  mentioned.  The  angels  knew  of  this  fact, 
according  to  their  understanding  of  human  nature,  for  Allah 
stated  that  He  would  create  man  from  clay.  Or,  the  angels 
understood  this  fact  from  the  word  Khalifah,  which  also  means 
the  person  who  judges  disputes  that  occur  between  people, 
forbidding  them  from  injustice  and  sin,  as  Al-Qurtubi  said. 

The  statement  the  angels  uttered  was  not  a  form  of 
disputing  with  Allah’s,  nor  out  of  envy  for  the  Children  of 
Adam,  as  some  mistakenly  thought.  All&h  has  described  them 
as  those  who  do  not  precede  Him  in  speaking,  meaning  that 
they  do  not  ask  Allah  anything  without  His  permission.  When 
Allah  informed  them  that  He  was  going  to  create  a  creation  on 
the  earth,  and  they  had  knowledge  that  this  creation  would 
commit  mischief  on  it,  as  Qatadah  mentioned,  they  said, 

XJJ  if  tJ-»  ^ff\} 

AWill  You  place  therein  those  who  will  make  mischief  therein 
and  sited  blood?} 

This  is  only  a  question  for  the  sake  of  learning  about  the 
wisdom  of  that,  as  if  they  said,  Our  Lord!  What  is  the  wisdom 
of  creating  such  creatures  since  they  will  cause  trouble  in  the 
earth  and  spill  blood?  ^  “If  the  wisdom  behind  this  action  is 
m 


At-Jabari  1 :464 . 


184 


Tafsir  Tbn  Kathir 


that  You  be  worshipped,  we  praise  and  glorify  You  (meaning 
we  pray  to  You)  we  never  indulge  in  mischief,  so  why  create 
other  creatures?” 

Allah  said  to  the  angels  in  answer  to  their  inquiry, 

'left 

4/  know  that  which  you  do  not  know .} 

meaning,  “I  know  that  the  benefit  of  creating  this  type  of 
creature  outweighs  the  harm  that  you  mentioned,  that  which 
you  have  no  knowledge  of.  1  will  create  among  them  Prophets 
and  send  Messengers.  I  will  also  create  among  them  truthful, 
martyrs,  righteous  believers,  worshippers,  the  modest,  the 
pious,  the  scholars  who  implement  their  knowledge,  humble 
people  and  those  who  love  Allah  and  follow  His  Messengers.” 

The  Sahih  recorded  that  when  the  angels  ascend  to  Allah 
with  the  records  of  the  servant’s  deeds,  Allah  asks  them,  while 
having  better  knowledge,  “How  did  you  leave  My  servants?” 
They  will  say,  “We  came  to  them  while  they  were  praying  and 
left  them  while  they  were  praying.”*11  This  is  because  the 
angels  work  in  shifts  with  mankind,  and  they  change  shifts 
during  the  Fajr  and  ‘Asr  prayers.  The  angels  who  descended 
will  remain  with  us,  while  the  angels  who  have  remained  with 
us  ascend  with  our  deeds.  The  Messenger  of  Allah  sg  said, 

«j&  £  4  £>:» 

«T7ie  deeds  of  the  night  are  elevated  to  Allah  before  the 
morning,  and  the  deeds  of  the  morning  before  the  night 
falls.  B*2’ 

Hence,  the  angels’  statement,  “We  came  to  them  while  they 
were  praying  and  left  them  while  they  were  praying,”  explains 
Allah’s  statement, 

Y  L*  pA 

4/  know  that  which  you  do  not  know.} 

It  was  said  that  the  meaning  of  Allah’s  statement, 

iSJSl  Y  G 

111  Fath  Al-Bari  13:426. 

*2*  Muslim  no.  179,  MusnadAbi  ‘Awanah  1 :145. 


185 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (25  -  49)  (Part-1) 


41  know  that  which  you  do  not  know.} 

is,  “I  have  a  specific  wisdom  in  creating  them,  which  you  do 
not  have  knowledge  of.”  It  was  also  said  that  it  is  in  answer 
to, 


iWhite  we  glorify  You  with  praises  and  thanks  and  sanctify  You} 
after  which  Allih  said, 


4>J&  vcfi*  -4<> 


41  know  that  which  you  do  not  knoio}.  Meaning,  “I  know  that  Iblis 
is  not  as  you  are,  although  he  is  among  you.”  Others  said, 


"4kVilI  You  place  therein  those  who  will  make  mischief  therein 
and  shed  blood,  -  while  we  glorify  you  zoith  praises  and 
thanks  and  sanctify  You.} 

is  their  request  that  they  should  be  allowed  to  inhabit  the 
earth,  instead  of  the  Children  of  Adam.  So  Allah  said  to  them, 

"V  £  jjic-t  ■$,[} 

41  know  that  which  you  do  not  know}  if  your  inhabiting  the 
heavens  is  better,  or  worse  for  you.”  Ar-Razi  as  well  as  others 
said  this.  Allah  knows  best. 


The  Obligation  of  appointing  a  Khalifah  and  some 
related  Issues 

Al-Qurtubi,  as  well  as  other  scholars,  said  that  this  Ayah 
(2:30)  proves  the  obligation  of  appointing  a  Khalifah  to  pass 
judgements  on  matters  of  dispute  between  people,  to  aid  the 
oppressed  against  the  oppressor,  to  implement  the  Islamic 
penal  code  and  to  forbid  evil.  There  are  many  other  tasks  that 
can  only  be  fulfilled  by  appointing  the  Imam,  and  what  is 
necessary  in  performing  an  obligation,  is  an  obligation  itself. 
We  should  state  here  that  Imamah  occurs  by  either  naming  a 
successor,  as  a  group  among  Ahl  As-Sunnah  scholars  said 
occurred  -  by  the  Prophet  jjj;  -  in  the  case  of  Abu  Bakr,  or 
hinting  to  a  successor.  Or,  the  current  Khalifah  names  a 
certain  person  as  Khalifah  after  him,  as  Abu  Bakr  did  with 
‘Umar.  Or,  the  Khalifah  might  leave  the  matter  in  the  hands  of 


187 


Surah  2.  Al-Bagaralt  (25  -  49)  (Part-1) 


431.  And  He  taught  Adam  all  the  names  (of  everything),  then 
He  showed  them  to  the  angels  and  said,  " Tell  Me  the  names  of 
these  if  you  are  truthful.  "} 

432.  They  (angels)  said:  " Glory  is  to  You,  we  have  no 
knowledge  except  what  you  have  taught  us.  Verily,  You  are  the 
Knoiver,  the  Wise."} 

433.  He  said:  "O  Adam!  Inform  them  of  their  names,"  and 
when  he  had  informed  them  of  their  names.  He  said :  "Did  I  not 
tell  you  that  I  know  the  Chayb  (unseen)  in  the  heavens  and  the 
earth,  and  I  ktioiu  what  you  reveal  and  what  you  have  been 
concealing ?"} 

The  Virtue  of  Adam  over  the  Angels 

Allah  stated  the  virtue  of  Adam  above  the  angels,  because  He 
taught  Adam,  rather  than  them,  the  names  of  everything.  This 
occurred  after  they  prostrated  to  him.  This  discussion 
precedes  that  event  here,  only  to  show  the  importance  of  his 
position,  and  the  absence  of  the  angels’  knowledge  about 
creating  the  Khalifah  when  they  asked  about  it.  So  Allah 
informed  the  angels  that  He  knows  what  they  do  not  know, 
and  then  He  mentioned  this  to  show  them  Adam’s  superiority 
over  them  in  knowledge.  Allah  said, 

4<#  TtVi  p;  fa} 


4And  He  taught  Adam  all  the  names  (of  everything)}. 
Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented  on  the  Ayah; 

4$  rtVf  p;  fa} 

4And  He  taught  Adam  all  the  names  (of  everything)} 
“Meaning,  the  names  that  people  use,  such  as  human,  animal, 
sky,  earth,  land,  sea,  horse,  donkey,  and  so  forth,  including 
the  names  of  the  other  species.”1*1  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  and  Ibn 

m 


At-Tabari  1 :458 . 


188 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathjr 


Jarir  reported  that  ‘Asim  bin  Kulayb  narrated  from  Said  bin 
Mahad  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  was  questioned, 

itft  *&Vf  fa} 


iAnd  He  taught  Adam  all  the  names  (of  everything)} 

“Did  Allah  teach  him  the  names  of  the  plate  and  the  pot?”  He 
said,  “Yes,  and  even  the  terms  for  breaking  wind!”*1' 

Allah  taught  Adam  the  names  of  everything,  their  proper 
names,  the  names  of  their  characteristics,  and  what  they  do, 
just  as  Ibn  ‘Abbas  stated  about  the  terms  for  passing  gas. 

In  his  Sahih,  Al-Bukhari  explained  this  Ayah  in  the  Book  of 
Tafsir  with  a  report  from  Anas  bin  Malik  who  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  said, 


j£  i  idij  Jju  ojl,  ibi  iuii  ^i!ji  f  \  cJf 
'fafi  -  oJ  :J^ii  Jii  ^  JU-  iCj  xp  0 
i«j J\  iiii  J^3  J j\  Jji*  \Uf  \fi\  -  & 

*  <JjAJ  —  j^w-j  <*JLp  <j  aJ  U  aj j  *}\yL  jSjjj  —  >5^  La  c.LL.1  idjju > 

ill  •uiS’  Ijlp  1^5l  :  J jili  ^5 La  oLJ  !  J aJ yG 

1  Jui  C— U  !  (J  i  Z\/y] \  allaplj 

C»J  !  J  yC*  <1  jj  Li  <lll  j  aJ  aluI  JLc-  Ij^t  I  tj  jAJ  “  Aj  j 

^  Lj  A-Ji  U  <d  jap  lJUt-  IJUaL»  Ijjil 

p  ill  U  ^£jLi  ^3  jiti  J3  ^ 

oJ-L>-U  c Ji J  aIxmJ  »LJL-ij  ^Ojl  !  J LL 

j  5^1  <*>*1  ^5  aL>J1  IjlL  J  jlAIs  ju«j>Lo 

AXil^il  AjdP^  p-S  Aj>Jl  p. g.L>0  1)  I Jb-  Jbx-5  ^i-il  “  aJLa  — 

-  jl  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  p  ^  ^  I  If/ 

fl^UJl  aIU-  Cjtjj  aLLL  ^1  jLll  U  :  Jyli 


vTlie  believers  will  gather  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection  and  will 
say ,  TAJ?  should  seek  a  means  of  intercession  with  our  Lord ' 
TTwny  io  Adam  and  say ,  'O  Adam!  You  arc  the  father  of 


m  At -Tabari  1  :475. 


189 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  ( Part-1 ) 

all  mankind,  Allah  created  you  with  His  Own  Hand,  ordered 
the  angels  to  prostrate  for  you  and  taught  you  the  names  of 
everything.  Will  you  not  intercede  for  us  with  your  Lord,  so 
that  he  relieve  us  from  this  gathering  place?'  On  that  Adam 
will  reply,  7  cannot  do  what  you  have  asked'.  He  will  have 
remembered  his  error  and  will  be  embarrassed,  saying,  'Go  to 
Niih,  for  he  is  the  first  of  Allah's  Messengers  whom  Allah  sent 
to  the  people  of  the  earth.’  They  will  go  to  Niih  and  ask  him. 

He  will  say,  7  cannot  do  what  you  have  asked.'  He  will  recall 
asking  Allah  what  he  was  not  to  know,  and  will  also  be 
embarrassed.  He  will  say,  'Go  to  Khalil  Ar-Rahmdn.'  They  will 
go  to  Ibrahim  and  he  will  also  say,  7  cannot  do  what  you  have 
asked.'  He  will  say,  'Go  to  Musa,  a  servant  to  whom  Allah 
spoke  directly  and  gave  the  Tawrdh.’  Musa  will  say,  7  cannot 
do  what  you  have  asked.’  He  loill  remember  that  he  killed  a 
person  without  justification  and  will  be  embarrassed  before  his 
Lord.  He  will  say,  'Go  to  7 sd,  Allah's  servant  and  Messenger 
and  His  Word  and  a  spirit  of  His.'111  They  will  go  to  7 sd  and 
he  will  say,  7  will  not  do  what  you  asked.  Go  to  Muhammad, 
a  servant  whose  previous  and  latter  errors  were  Jbrgiven.'  They 
will  come  to  me,  and  I  will  go  to  Allah  and  seek  His  pennission 
and  He  will  give  me  His  permission.  When  I  gaze  at  my  Lord, 

I  will  prostrate  myself  and  Allah  will  allow  me  to  remain  like 
that  as  much  as  He  will.  Then  I  will  be  addressed,  'O 
Muhamtnad!  Raise  your  head;  ask,  for  you  will  be  given  wlial 
you  ask,  and  intercede,  for  your  intercession  will  be  accepted.’  I 
will  raise  my  head  and  thank  and  praise  Allah  with  such  praise 
as  He  will  inspire  me.  I  will  intercede  and  He  will  grant  me  a 
quantity  of  people  that  He  will  admit  into  Paradise.  I  will  go 
back  to  Him,  and  when  I  see  my  Lord,  I  will  intercede  and  He 
will  allow  me  a  quantity  that  He  will  admit  into  Paradise.  I 
will  do  that  for  a  third  and  then  a  fourth  time.  I  will  say, 
'There  are  no  more  people  left  in  Hell  except  those  vohom  the 
Qur'an  has  incarcerated  and  have  thus  acquired  eternity  in 
He//.'®121  This  Hadith  was  collected  by  Muslim,  An- 

***  Allah’s  Word  and  spirit;  the  meaning  here  is  that  Allah  created  him 
with  a  word,  "Be"  and  he  was,  and  that  he  is  a  spirit  from  the 
spirits  that  Allah  created,  as  Ibn  Kathlr  discusses  later. 

Fath  Al-Bari  8:10. 


|2| 


190 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathir 


Nasa’i*1'  and  Ibn  Majah. 


The  reason  why  we  mentioned  this  Hadith  here  is  the 
Prophet’s  statement, 


ilUpj  iu  'X,  ill  iliU  y\ 


-  >1  ' 
ok  l) 

JS 


“They  will  go  to  Adam  and  say,  ‘O  Adam!  You  are  the  father 
of  all  mankind,  and  Allah  created  you  with  His  Own  Hand, 
ordered  the  angels  to  prostrate  for  you,  and  taught  you  the 
names  of  everything* .|2’ 

This  part  of  the  Hadith  testifies  to  the  fact  that  Allah  taught 
Adam  the  names  of  all  creatures. 

This  is  why  Allah  said, 

«<££>'<  &  ’&■  "A 


iThen  He  showed  them  to  the  angels }  meaning,  the  objects  or 
creations.  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  narrated  that  Ma'mar  said  that 
Qatadah  said,  "Allah  paraded  the  objects  before  the  angels, 

&&} 


iAnd  said ,  "Tell  Me  the  names  of  these  if  you  are 
truthful"}”™ 

Allah's  statement  means,  "Tell  Me  the  names  of  what  1 
paraded  before  you,  O  angels  who  said, 


iWill  You  place  therein  those  who  zoill  make  mischief  therein 
and  shed  blood}. 

You  asked,  ‘Are  You  appointing  a  Khalifah  from  us  or  from 
other  creations?  We  praise  and  glorify  You. 

Therefore,  Allah  said,  "If  you  say  the  truth,  that  if  I  appoint 
a  non-angel  Khalifah  on  the  earth,  he  and  his  offspring  will 
disobey  Me,  commit  mischief  and  shed  blood,  but  if  I  designate 
you  the  Khallfahs  you  will  obey  Me,  follow  My  command  and 


™  Muslim  1  : 181 ,  and  An-Nasa’i  in  Al-Kubra  6 :284 . 

™  Muslim  1:181,  An-Nasa’i  in  Al-Kubra  6:364,  and  Ibn  Majah 
2:1442. 

™  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  1 :42 . 


191 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49}  (Part-1) 


honor  and  glorify  Me.  However,  since  you  do  not  know  the 
names  of  the  objects  I  paraded  before  you,  then  you  have  even 
less  knowledge  of  what  will  occur  on  the  earth  that  does  not 
exist  yet.” 


fgt  ci  £  <\  U  fk  'J  !#» 


iThey  (angels)  said:  " Glory  is  to  You,  we  have  no  knowledge 
except  what  you  have  taught  us.  Verily,  it  is  You,  the  Knower, 
the  Wise."}. 


Here  the  angels  are  praising  Allah’s  holiness,  and  perfection 
above  every  kind  of  deficiency,  affirming  that  no  creature  could 
ever  acquire  any  part  of  Allah’s  knowledge,  except  by  His 
permission,  nor  could  anyone  know  anything  except  what 
Allah  teaches  them.  This  is  why  they  said, 


4"  Glory  is  to  You,  we  have  no  knowledge  except  wluit  you  have 
taught  us.  Verily  You  are  the  Knower,  the  Wise^ 

meaning,  Allah  is  knowledgeable  of  everything,  Most  Wise 
about  His  creation,  and  He  makes  the  wisest  decisions,  and 
He  teaches  and  deprives  whom  He  wills  from  knowledge. 
Verily,  Allah’s  wisdom  and  justice  in  all  matters  is  perfect. 


Adam’s  Virtue  of  Knowledge  is  demonstrated 

Allah  said, 


pm 


r&S  t&.  JtJ> 


4He  said:  "O  Adam!  Inform  them  of  their  names,"  and  when 
he  had  informed  them  of  their  names,  He  said :  "Did  I  not  tell 
you  that  /  know  the  Ghayb  (unseen)  in  the  heavens  and  the 
earth,  and  l  know  what  you  reveal  and  what  you  have  been 

concealing?"} 

Zayd  bin  Aslam  said,  “You  are  Jibril,  you  are  MIka’il,  you  are 
Israfil,  until  he  mentioned  the  name  of  the  crow.”111  Mujahid 
said  that  Allah’s  statement, 


m 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :1 18. 


192 


Tafcir  Ibn  Kathir 


iHe  said:  "O  Adam!  Inform  them  of  their  names, ”) 


“The  name  of  the  pigeon,  the  crow  and  everything.”*1* 
Statements  of  a  similar  meaning  were  reported  from  Said  bin 
Jubayr,  Al-Hasan,  and  Qatadah.*2*  When  Adam’s  virtue  over 
the  angels  became  apparent,  as  he  mentioned  the  names  that 
Allah  taught  him,  Allah  said  to  the  angels, 


pr  c  c  pjj  jfHZ  ^  a  P  -4i  p  jit 


iDid  I  not  tell  you  that  I  know  the  Chayb  (unseen)  in  the 
heavens  and  the  earth,  and  I  know  what  you  reveal  and  what 
you  have  been  concealing?) 


This  means,  “Did  1  not  state  that  1  know  the  seen  and 
unseen  matters.”  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


J3  p  *f$  SZ* 


iAnd  if  you  (O  Muhammad  jfe)  speak  (the  invocation)  aloud, 
then  verily,  He  knows  the  secret  and  that  which  is  yet  more 
hidden )  (20:7). 


Also,  Allah  said  about  the  hoopoe,  that  it  said  to  Sulayman; 

■f?  .OyijZ  U f  jjiiC  b  JAajj  Jfjfj  j  \}*X  »,*..} 

1^*1*  vu  _>*  li)  V 


i[As  Shaytdn  (Satan)  has  barred  them  from  Allah's  way]  so 
they  do  not  prostrate  before  Allah,  Wlw  brings  to  light  what  is 
hidden  in  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  knows  what  you 
conceal  and  what  you  reveal.  Allah,  Ld  ilaha  ilia  Huwa  (none 
has  the  right  to  be  worshipped  but  He),  the  Lord  of  the  Supreme 
Throne!)  (27:25-26). 


They  also  have  comments  other  than  what  we  have  said 
about  the  meaning  of  Allah’s  statement, 


i&&pr\z&tcph) 


iAnd  I  know  what  you  reveal  and  what  you  have  been 
concealing). 


***  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:119. 
*2*  Ibid. 


Surah  L  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  ( Parti > 


193 


It  is  reported  from  Ad-Dahhak  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that, 

i'oJ&  pr  $  *3  C  pS# 


iAnd  I  know  what  you  reveal  and  zohat  you  have  been 
concealing > 

means,  “I  know  the  secrets,  just  as  I  know  the  apparent 
things,  such  as,  what  Iblls  concealed  in  his  heart  of  arrogance 
and  pride.”*11  Abu  JaYar  Ar-Razi  narrated  that  Ar-Rabr  bin 
Anas  said  that, 


i'oJ&  pr  ts  *4  c 


iAnd  I  know  what  you  reveal  and  zvhat  you  have  been 
concealing} 

means,  “The  apparent  part  of  what  they  said  was:  ‘Do  you 
create  in  it  that  which  would  commit  mischief  and  shed 
blood?’  The  hidden  meaning  was:  *We  have  more  knowledge 
and  honor  than  any  creation  our  Lord  would  create.’  But  they 
came  to  know  that  Allah  favored  Adam  above  them  regarding 
knowledge  and  honor.” 


^  OS  crijfl  !>  *  (*%  ^.f} 


i34.  And  (remember)  when  We  said  to  the  angels  :  "Prostrate 
yourselves  before  Adam."  And  they  prostrated  except  Iblis 
(Shay tan),  he  refused  and  was  proud  and  was  one  of  the 
disbelievers  (disobedient  to  Allah).} 


Honoring  Adam  when  the  Angels  prostrated  before  Him 

This  Ayah  mentions  the  great  honor  that  Allah  granted 
Adam,  and  Allah  reminded  Adam’s  offspring  of  this  fact.  Allah 
commanded  the  angels  to  prostrate  before  Adam,  as  this  Ayah 
and  many  Hadiths  testify,  such  as  the  Hadith  about  the 
intercession  that  we  discussed.  There  is  a  Hadith  about  the 
supplication  of  Musa,  “O  my  Lord!  Show  me  Adam  who  caused 
us  and  himself  to  be  thrown  out  of  Paradise.”  When  Musa  met 
Adam,  he  said  to  him,  “Are  you  Adam  whom  Allah  created 
with  His  Own  Hands,  blew  life  into  and  commanded  the  angels 
to  prostrate  before?”*21 


***  At -Tabari  1  :498. 
121  Abu  DAwud  5:28. 


394 _ Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

Iblis  was  among  Those  ordered  to  prostrate  before 
Adam,  although  He  was  not  an  Angel 

When  Allah  commanded  the  angels  to  prostrate  before  Adam, 
Iblis  was  included  in  this  command.  Although  Iblis  was  not  an 
angel,  he  was  trying  -  and  pretending  -  to  imitate  the  angels’ 
behavior  and  deeds,  and  this  is  why  he  was  also  included  in 
the  command  to  the  angels  to  prostrate  before  Adam.  Satan 
was  criticized  for  defying  that  command,  as  we  will  explain 
with  detail,  Allah  willing,  when  we  mention  the  Tafsir  of  Allah’s 
statement, 

£  IA  iS-"  4^'  •Ji  ^ 

iExcept  Iblis  (Satan).  He  was  one  of  the  Jinn;  he  disobeyed  the 
command  of  his  Lord  .}  (18:50) 

Similarly,  Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
said,  “Before  he  undertook  the  path  of  sin,  Iblis  was  with  the 
angels  and  was  called  ‘Azazll.’  He  was  among  the  residents  of 
the  earth  and  was  one  of  the  most  active  worshippers  and 
knowledgeable  persons  among  the  angels.  This  fact  caused 
him  to  be  arrogant.  Iblis  was  from  a  genus  called  Jinn.”* 11 


The  Prostration  was  before  Adam  but  the  Obedience  was 
to  Allah 

Qatadah  commented  on  Allah’s  statement, 
if. >i  ijlU'  Xfoi  Gii 


iAnd  (remember)  when  We  said  to  the  angels:  "Prostrate 
yourselves  before  Adam."} 


“The  obedience  was  for  Allah  and  the  prostration  was  before 
Adam.  Allah  honored  Adam  and  commanded  the  angels  to 
prostrate  before  him.”*21  Some  people  said  that  this 
prostration  was  just  a  prostration  of  greeting,  peace  and 
honor,  hence  Allah’s  statement, 


^  j5  *  'J&  j €  *A  &  i&'&b 


1,1  At-Tabari  1 :502. 
121  At-Tabari  1 :512. 


195 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Parti) 


4And  he  (Prophet  Yusuf)  raised  his  parents  to  the  throne  and 
they  fell  doivn  before  him  prostrate.  And  he  said:  "O  my 
father!  This  is  the  interpretation  of  my  dream  aforetime!  My 
Lord  has  made  it  come  true!”}  (12:100) 


The  practice  of  prostrating  was  allowed  for  previous  nations, 
but  was  repealed  for  ours.  Mu'adh  said  to  the  Prophet  sg,  “I 
visited  Ash-Sham  and  found  that  they  used  to  prostate  before 
their  priests  and  scholars.  You,  O  Messenger  of  Allah,  are  more 
deserving  of  prostration.”  The  Prophet  sg  said, 


^  jJLj  i>w  jl  t f 

“Ullt  *A>- 


a  No.  If  I  was  to  command  any  human  to  prostrate  before 
another  human,  I  would  command  the  wife  to  prostrate  before 
her  husband  because  of  the  enormity  of  Ins  right  on  Iter.* ^ 

Ar-Razi  agreed  with  this  view.  Also,  Qatadah  said  about 
Allah’s  statement, 

4 And  they  prostrated  except  Iblis  (Shay tan),  he  refused  and  was 
proud  and  zvas  one  of  the  disbelievers  (disobedient  to  Allah).} 

“Iblis,  the  enemy  of  Allah,  envied  Adam  because  Allah 
honored  Adam.  He  said,  1  was  created  from  fire,  and  he  was 
created  from  clay.’  Therefore,  the  first  error  ever  committed 
was  arrogance,  for  the  enemy  of  Allah  was  too  arrogant  to 
prostrate  before  Adam.”*21  I  -  Ibn  Kathlr  -  say,  the  following  is 
recorded  in  the  Sahih, 

JUi*  4J4  l)\S  Y* 

*No  person  who  has  the  weight  of  a  mustard  seed  of  arrogance 
in  his  heart  shall  enter  Paradise .»|31 

Iblis  had  disbelief,  arrogance,  and  rebellion,  all  of  which 
caused  him  to  be  expelled  from  the  holy  presence  of  Allah,  and 
His  mercy. 

111  At-Tirmidhi  no.l  109,  Majma‘  Az-Zawa’id  4 :310. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :123. 

131  Muslim  1 :93 . 


196 


Tgfsir  Ibn  Kathir 


X3&  }£  &  %  £4  44  &  2®  41  y& 

^  ue>  Xi  *?  £*  IhX>&  >£  i4li(  qfcfc  Ss  #8 

^  .-iff  •  *>r^ 

JJ  £-j  ^ — •  U?L>^  Jj  >A>  J-^  L^*rl 


435.  And  We  said:  "O  Adam!  Dwell  you  and  your  wife  in  the 
Paradise  and  eat  both  of  you  freely  with  pleasure  and  delight,  of 
things  therein  wherever  you  will,  but  come  not  near  this  tree  or 
you  both  will  be  of  the  Zalimin  (wrongdoers) ."} 

436.  Then  the  Shay  tan  made  them  slip  therefrom  (the  Paradise), 
and  got  them  out  from  that  in  which  they  were.  We  said:  " Get 
you  down,  all,  with  enmity  between  yourselves.  On  earth  will 
be  a  dwelling  place  for  you  and  an  enjoyment  for  a  time."} 


Adam  was  honored  again 

Allah  honored  Adam  by  commanding  the  angels  to  prostrate 
before  him,  so  they  all  complied  except  for  Iblls.  Allah  then 
allowed  Adam  to  live  and  eat  wherever  and  whatever  he 
wished  in  Paradise.  Al-Hafiz  Abu  Bakr  bin  Marduwyah 
reported  Abu  Dharr  saying,  “I  said,  ‘O  Messenger  of  Allah!  Was 
Adam  a  Prophet?’  He  said, 

&  Lk  y jLj  ts 

•  Yes.  He  was  a  Prophet  and  a  Messenger  to  whom  Allah  spoke 
directly",  meaning 

43-'  4i»  cJ  ifcS} 

4(0  Adam!)  Dwell  you  and  your  wife  in  the  Paradise.}"11* 


Hawwa’  was  created  before  Adam  entered  Paradise 

The  Ayah  (2:35)  indicates  that  Hawwa’  was  created  before 
Adam  entered  Paradise,  as  Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  stated.  Ibn 
Ishaq  said,  “After  Allah  finished  criticizing  Iblls,  and  after 
teaching  Adam  the  names  of  everything,  He  said, 

40  Adam!  Inform  them  of  their  names ^  until, 

111  Al-Azamah  5:1553. 


Siirah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Parti} 


197 


4 Verily,  You  are  the  Knower,  the  Wise.} 

Then  Adam  fell  asleep,  as  the  People  of  the  Book  and  other 
scholars  such  as  Ibn  ‘Abbas  have  stated,  Allah  took  one  of 
Adam’s  left  ribs  and  made  flesh  grow  in  its  place,  while  Adam 
was  asleep  and  unaware.  Allah  then  created  Adam’s  wife, 
Hawwa’,  from  his  rib  and  made  her  a  woman,  so  that  she 
could  be  a  comfort  for  him.  When  Adam  woke  up  and  saw 
Hawwa’  next  to  him,  it  was  claimed,  he  said,  ‘My  flesh  and 
blood,  my  wife.’  Hence,  Adam  reclined  with  tfawwa’.  When 
Allah  married  Adam  to  Hawwa’  and  gave  him  comfort,  Allah 
said  to  him  directly, 


iM  .j£  ^  ytj  £&  &&  &  &  ?&> 


oi 


4"0  Adam!  Dwell  you  and  your  wife  in  the  Paradise  and  eat 
both  of  you  freely  with  pleasure  and  delight,  of  things  therein 
wherever  you  will,  but  come  not  near  this  tree  or  you  both  will 
be  of  Ok  Zalimin  (wrongdoers) .”}.”[}] 


Allah  tests  Adam 

Allah’s  statement  to  Adam, 

ibut  come  not  near  this  tree} 

is  a  test  for  Adam.  There  are  conflicting  opinions  over  the 
nature  of  the  tree  mentioned  here.  Some  said  that  it  was  the 
grape  tree,  barley,  date  tree,  fig  tree,  and  so  forth.  Some  said 
that  it  was  a  certain  tree,  and  whoever  eats  from  it  will  be 
relieved  of  the  call  of  nature.  It  was  also  said  that  it  was  a  tree 
from  which  the  angels  eat  so  that  they  live  for  eternity.  Imam 
Abu  JaTar  bin  Jarir  said,  “The  correct  opinion  is  that  Allah 
forbade  Adam  and  his  wife  from  eating  from  a  certain  tree  in 
Paradise,  but  they  ate  from  it.  We  do  not  know  which  tree  that 
was,  because  Allah  has  not  mentioned  anything  in  the  Qur’an 
or  the  authentic  Sunnah  about  the  nature  of  this  tree.  It  was 

m 


At-Tabari  1 :514. 


198 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathtr 


said  that  it  was  barley,  grape,  or  a  fig  tree.  It  is  possible  that  it 
was  one  of  those  trees.  Yet,  this  is  knowledge  that  does  not 
bring  any  benefit,  just  as  being  ignorant  in  its  nature  does  no 
harm.  Allah  knows  best.”*1'  This  is  similar  to  what  Ar-Razi 
stated  in  his  Tafsir,  and  this  is  the  correct  opinion. 

Allah’s  statement, 

i<£  \$$} 

iThen  the  Shay  tan  made  them  slip  therefrom} 

either  refers  to  Paradise,  and  in  this  case,  it  means  that 
Shaytan  led  Adam  and  Hawwa*  away  from  it,  as  ‘Asim  bin  Abi 
An-Najud  recited  it.*2*  It  is  also  possible  that  this  Ayah  refers 
to  the  forbidden  tree.  In  this  case,  the  Ayah  would  mean,  as 
Al-Hasan  and  Qatadah  stated,  “He  tripped  them/'*3*  In  this 
case, 

iTIien  the  Shaytan  made  them  slip  therefrom} 
means,  “Because  of  the  tree”,  just  as  Allah  said, 

s  lie  dfy} 


iTurtted  aside  therefrom  (i.e.  from  Muhammad  s&  and  the 
Qur'an)  is  he  who  is  turned  aside  (by  the  decree  and 
preordainment  of  Alldli)}  (51:9) 

meaning,  the  deviant  person  becomes  turned  aside  -  or  slips  - 
from  the  truth  because  of  so  and  so  reason.  This  is  why  then 
Allah  said, 

iAnd  got  them  out  from  that  in  which  they  were} 

meaning,  the  clothes,  spacious  dwelling  and  comfortable 
sustenance. 


m  At-Tabari  1 :520. 

*2>  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :128. 

*3'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :128,  129. 


199 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Parti} 

4 We  said:  “ Get  you  down,  all,  with  enmity  between 
yourselves.  On  earth  will  be  a  dwelling  place  for  you  and  an 
enjoyment  for  a  time."} 

meaning,  dwelling,  sustenance  and  limited  life,  until  the 
commencement  of  the  Day  of  Resurrection 


Adam  was  very  Tall 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  narrated  that  Ubayy  bin  Ka*b  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


jlS  Uii  VJrj  fSl  Jli  2>l 

-CJb  Jjij-  JjJj  uii  4  *jjj&  ^  IJj  U  Jjti  -CP  JajL*  S^>wJl 

UJj  ^ U  oblii  ,  S^»w  o yw  1 

•tlJuil  V  U  :  Jli  ^  ^ 


created  Adam  tall,  with  thick  hair,  just  as  a  date  tree 
with  full  branches.  When  Adam  ate  from  the  forbidden  tree,  his 
cover  fell  off,  and  the  first  thing  that  appeared  was  his  private 
area.  When  he  saiv  his  private  area,  he  ran  away  in  Paradise 
and  his  hair  got  caught  in  a  tree.  He  tried  to  free  himself  and 
Ar-Rahmdn  called  him,  'O  Adam!  Are  you  running  away  from 
Me?'  When  Adam  heard  the  ivords  of  Ar-Rahmdn  (Allah),  he 
said,  'No,  O  my  Lord!  But  I  am  shy.'»lli 


Adam  remained  in  Paradise  for  an  Hour 

Al-Hakim  recorded  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Adam  was  allowed 
to  reside  in  Paradise  during  the  time  period  between  the  ‘Asr 
(Afternoon)  prayer,  until  sunset.”  Al-Hakim  then  commented 
this  is  “Sahih  according  to  the  Two  Shaykhs  (Al-Bukhari  and 
Muslim),  but  they  did  not  include  it  in  their  collections.  ”'21 
Also,  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  recorded  Ibn  ‘Abbas  saying,  “Allah  sent 
Adam  to  earth  to  an  area  called,  Dahna,  between  Makkah  and 
At-Ta’if.”*31  Al-Hasan  Al-Basri  said  that  Adam  was  sent  down 
to  India,  while  Hawwa’  was  sent  to  Jeddah.  Iblls  was  sent 
down  to  Dustumaysan,  several  miles  from  Basra.  Further,  the 

111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :129. 

121  Al-Hakim  2:542. 

*3*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 : 1 3 1 . 


200 


Tafsir  Jbtt  Kathir 


snake  was  sent  down  to  Asbahan.  This  was  reported  by  Ibn 
Abi  Hatim.1’1  Also,  Muslim  and  An-Nasa’i  recorded  that  Abu 
Hurayrah  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  said, 


“ Friday  is  the  best  day  on  which  the  sun  has  risen.  On  Friday, 
Allah  created  Adam,  admitted  him  into  Paradise,  and  expelled 
him  from 


A  Doubt  and  a  Rebuttal 


If  one  asks,  “If  the  Paradise  that  Adam  was  thrown  out  of 
was  in  heaven,  as  the  majority  of  the  scholars  assert,  then  is 
it  possible  for  Iblls  to  enter  Paradise,  although  he  was  expelled 
from  it  by  Allah’s  decision  (when  he  refused  to  prostrate  before 
Adam)?” 

Basically,  the  response  to  this  would  be  that  the  Paradise 
which  Adam  was  in,  was  in  the  heavens,  not  on  the  earth,  as 
we  explained  in  the  beginning  of  our  book  Al-Bidayah  wan- 
Nihayah. 

The  majority  of  scholars  said  that  Shaytan  was  originally 
prohibited  from  entering  Paradise,  but  there  were  times  when 
he  sneaked  into  it  in  secret.  For  instance,  the  Tawrah  stated 
that  Iblls  hid  inside  the  snake’s  mouth  and  entered  Paradise. 
Some  scholars  said  that  it  is  possible  that  Shaytan  led  Adam 
and  Hawwa’  astray  on  his  way  out  of  Paradise.  Some  scholars 
said  that  he  led  Adam  and  Hawwa’  astray  when  he  was  on 
earth,  while  they  were  still  in  heaven,  as  stated  by  A z- 
Zamakhshari.  Al-Qurtubi  mentioned  several  beneficial  Hadiths 
here  about  snakes  and  the  ruling  on  killing  them. 


4^^  j*  ft  ^  &  f»\i  & 


437.  Then  Adam  received  from  his  Lord  Words.  And  his  Lord 
pardoned  him  (accepted  his  repentance).  Verily,  He  is  the  One 
Who  forgives  (accepts  repentance),  the  Most  Merciful > 

111  lbn  Abi  Hatim  1 :132. 

Muslim  2 :585 ,  and  An-Nasa’i  3 :90 . 


Siirah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49}  (Part-1) 


201 


Adam  repents  and  supplicates  to  Allah 

It  was  reported  that  the  above  Ayah  is  explained  by  Allah’s 
statement, 


c^y  u  ji2  ■)  dl  Cj  H) 


i37.  They  said:  "Our  Lord!  We  have  wronged  ourselves.  If 
You  forgive  us  not,  and  bestow  not  upon  us  Your  mercy,  we 
shall  certainly  be  of  the  losers  (7:23) 

as  Mujahid,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin 
Anas,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Muhammad  bin  Ka*b  Al-Qurazi, 
Khalid  bin  Ma'dan,  ‘Ata’  Al-Khurasani  and  ‘Abdur-Rahman  bin 
Zayd  bin  Aslam  have  stated.1 11  As-Suddi  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
commented  on, 

AThen  Adam  received  from  his  Lord  Words } 

“Adam  said,  ‘O  Lord!  Did  You  not  created  me  with  Your  Own 
Hands?’  He  said,  ‘Yes.’  He  said,  ‘And  blow  life  into  me?’  He 
said,  ‘Yes.’  He  said,  ‘And  when  I  sneezed,  You  said,  ‘May  Allah 
grant  you  His  mercy.’  Does  not  Your  mercy  precede  Your 
anger?’  He  was  told,  Yes.’  Adam  said,  ‘And  You  destined  me  to 
commit  this  evil  act?’  He  was  told.  Yes.’  He  said,  If  I  repent, 
will  You  send  me  back  to  Paradise?’  Allah  said,  Yes. ’ 
Similar  is  reported  from  Al-‘Awfi,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Said  bin 
Ma*bad,  and  Ibn  ‘Abbas.13'  Al-Hakim  recorded  this  Hadith  in 
his  Mustadra ft14*  from  Ibn  Jubayr,  who  narrated  it  from  Ibn 
‘Abbas.  Al-Hakim  said,  “Its  chain  is  Sahih  and  they  (Al- 
Bukhari  and  Muslim)  did  not  record  it.” 

Allah’s  statement, 

iVerily,  He  is  the  One  Who  forgives  (accepts  repentance),  the  Most 
Merciful }  (2:37) 

means  that  Allah  forgives  whoever  regrets  his  error  and 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :136  and  At-Tabari  1 :543,  546. 
121  At-Tabari  1 :543  : 

131  At-Tabari  1 :542 . 

141  2:545. 


202 


mVA  V 

^<!y  4^*-L(j  (*-*ijlil '  dl£)j\  foijlij  i j*. j§ 

-^&!)^^yfS^!iS'i!J!*:i-^; 

$  <^^’J^i(*rl)(*i;->l>^*  (♦t^  ojUaj^j] '  ^ 
&&&&&%&£«&&&& 

t&\'  >y.,'Wi'^'.'\''  -!-;•» 


_ Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

tjigigu  v^,  returns  to  Him  in 
repentance.  This 
meaning  is  similar  to 
Allah’s  statements, 

j£  y  a  3  53LS  jil» 

<4*  £  ^ 


4Knou>  they  not  that 
Allah  accepts  repentance 
from  His  servants } 
(9:104), 

jl  cj^.  Ji^ 

<£2 

iAnd  whoever  does  evil 
or  wrongs  himself} 
(4:110)  and 

iAnd  whosoever  repents 
and  does  righteous  good 
deeds }  (25:71). 

The  Ayat  mentioned 
above,  testify  to  the 
fact  that  Allah  forgives  the  sins  of  whoever  repents, 
demonstrating  His  kindness  and  mercy  towards  His  creation 
and  servants.  There  is  no  deity  worthy  of  worship  except  Allah, 
the  Most  Forgiving,  the  Most  Merciful. 

I**  'IJ  [« jjf’  >-*}»■  <jjj*  pCltjb  UL*:  i^Lyi  Gii^ 

^  oj4t»-  Vfj  ji*  \yjSj  \ff^  if  j jlj 


438.  We  said:  "Gel  doom  all  of  you  from  this  place  (the 
Paradise),  then  whenever  there  comes  to  you  Hudan  (guidance) 
from  Me,  and  whoever  follows  My  guidance,  there  shall  be  no 
fear  on  them,  nor  shall  they  grieve. ^ 

439.  But  those  who  disbelieve  and  belie  Our  Ayat  (proofs, 
evidences,  verses,  lessons,  signs,  revelations,  etc.)  -  such  are 
the  dwellers  of  the  Fire.  They  shall  abide  therein  forever."} 


203 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Parti} 

Allah  stated  that  when  He  sent  Adam,  Hawwa’,  and  Shaytan 
to  earth  from  Paradise,  He  warned  them  that  He  will  reveal 
Books  and  send  Prophets  and  Messengers  to  them,  i.e.,  to 
their  offspring.  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  said,  “ Al-Huda ,  refers  to  the 
Prophets,  Messengers,  the  clear  signs  and  plain 
explanation.”1 11 

its  'ji  y 

iAnd  whoever  follows  My  guidance ^  meaning,  whoever  accepts 
what  is  contained  in  My  Books  and  what  I  send  the  Messengers 
with, 

iThere  shall  be  no  fear  on  them}  regarding  the  Hereafter, 


inor  shall  they  grieve}  regarding  the  life  of  this  world.  Similarly, 
in  Surat  Ta  Ha,  Allah  said, 


*  Jui  g  p  oii  £  uu  &  jfi  pz  U &} 

J.  -.  *  - 


iHe  (Allah)  said:  "Get  you  down  (from  the  Paradise  to  the 
earth),  both  of  you,  together,  some  of  you  are  an  enemy  to  some 
others.  Then  if  there  comes  to  you  guidance  from  Me,  then 
whoever  follows  My  guidance,  he  shall  neither  go  astray,  nor 
shall  he  be  distressed.}  (20:123) 


Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented,  “He  will  not  be  misguided  in  this  life 
or  miserable  in  the  Hereafter.”'21  The  Ayah, 


iBut  whosoever  turns  away  from  My  Reminder  (i.e.  neither  believes 
in  this  Qur’an  nor  acts  on  its  teachings)  verily,  for  him  is  a  life  of 
hardship,  and  We  shall  raise  him  up  blind  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection.}  (20:124)  is  similar  to  what  Allah  stated  here, 


ifpW-  ^  UM >> 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :139. 
121  At-Tabari  18:389. 


204 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


iBut  those  who  disbelieve  and  belie  Our  Aydt  -  such  are  the 
dwellers  of  the  Fire.  They  shall  abide  therein  forever },  meaning,  they 
will  remain  in  Hell  for  eternity  and  will  not  find  a  way  out  of  it. 


&S  ft*  ^  & VI 

$4  Cs  &  $  £  ft  $  \'}p  %  fa  d  iiai  ii-J  u, 


440.  O  Children  of  Israel!  Remember  My  favor  which  I 
bestowed  upon  you,  and  fulfill  (your  obligations  to)  My 
covenant  (with  you)  so  that  I  fulfill  (My  obligations  to)  your 
covenant  (with  Me),  and  fear  none  but  Me.} 

442.  And  believe  in  what  I  have  sent  down  (this  Qur'an), 
confirming  that  which  is  with  you  (the  Tawriih  and  the  Injtl), 
and  be  not  the  first  to  disbelieve  therein,  and  buy  not  with  My 
verses  (the  Tawrdh  and  the  Injil)  a  small  price  (i.e.  getting  a 
small  gain  by  selling  My  verses),  and  fear  Me  and  Me  alone.} 


Encouraging  the  Children  of  Israel  to  embrace  Islam 

Allah  commanded  the  Children  of  Israel  to  embrace  Islam 
and  to  follow  Muhammad  jg.  He  also  reminded  them  with  the 
example  of  their  father  Israel,  Allah’s  Prophet  Ya'qub,  as  if 
saying,  “O  children  of  the  pious,  righteous  servant  of  Allah  who 
obeyed  Allah!  Be  like  your  father,  following  the  truth.”  This 
statement  is  similar  to  one’s  saying,  “O  you  son  of  that 
generous  man!  Do  this  or  that”  or,  “O  son  of  the  brave  man, 
engage  the  strong  fighters,”  or  “O  son  of  the  scholar,  seek  the 
knowledge,”  and  so  forth.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


4  AjJ  pj  C  bL£  dr* 


40  offspring  of  those  whom  We  carried  (in  the  ship)  with  Niih 
(Noah)!  Verily,  he  was  a  grateful  servant}  (17:3). 


Israel  is  Prophet  Ya'qub  (Jacob) 

Israel  is  Prophet  Ya'qQb,  for  Abu  Dawud  At-Tayalisi  recorded 
that  ‘Abdullah  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “A  group  of  Jews  came  to  the 
Prophet  5^  and  he  said  to  them, 


205 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Parti) 

“Do  you  know  that  Israel  is  Jacob?*  They  said,  “Yes,  by  Allah.” 
He  said, 

^  $  11 ' * 

“O  Allah!  Be  ^vitness.»”,1, 

At-Tabari  recorded  that  ‘Abdullah  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that 
Israel’  means,  “the  servant  of  Allah.’12* 


Allah's  Blessings  for  the  Children  of  Israel 

Allah  said, 


A-&  !£»► 


^Remember  My  favor  which  I  bestowed  upon  you}. 


Mujahid  commented,  “Allah’s  favor  that  He  granted  the  Jews 
is  that  He  made  water  gush  from  stones,  sent  down  manna 
and  quails  for  them,  and  saved  them  from  being  enslaved  by 
Pharaoh.”13*  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  also  said,  “Allah’s  favor  mentioned 
here  is  His  sending  Prophets  and  Messengers  among  them, 
and  revealing  Books  to  them.”1'’1  I  -  Ibn  Kathir  -  say  that  this 
Ayah  is  similar  to  what  Musa  said  to  the  Children  of  Israel, 


t  j&XZ  $2  ili  «4^T it  4%,} 


AU&S'  Si  CJ 


40  my  people!  Remember  the  favor  of  Allah  to  you :  when  He  made 
Prophets  among  you,  made  you  kings,  and  gave  you  what  He  had 
not  given  to  any  other  among  the  nations  (of  their  time}  (5:20) 

meaning,  during  their  time.  Also,  Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  said 
that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 

^Remember  My  favor  which  I  bestowed  upon  you,} 

means,  “My  support  for  you  and  your  fathers,”  that  is  saving 
them  from  Pharaoh  and  his  people. 

11  *  Musnad  At-Tayalisi  no.  356. 

121  At-Tabari  1:553. 

131  At-Tabari  1  :556 
141  Ibid. 


206 _ Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

Reminding  the  Children  of  Israel  of  Allah's  Covenant 
with  Them 

Allah’s  statement, 


iAnd  fulfill  (your  obligations  to)  My  covenant  (with  you)  so 
that  l  fulfill  (My  obligations  to)  your  covenant  (with  Me),} 


means,  ‘My  covenant  that  I  took  from  you  concerning  Prophet 
Muhammad  jg,  when  he  is  sent  to  you,  so  that  I  grant  you 
what  1  promised  you  if  you  believe  in  him  and  follow  him.  1  will 
then  remove  the  chains  and  restrictions  that  were  placed 
around  your  necks,  because  of  the  errors  that  you 
committed.’'1*  Also,  Al-Hasan  Al-Basri*2*  said,  “The  ‘covenant’ 
is  in  reference  to  Allah’s  statement, 


ji  i if  'Jl  CSZS  Ji&i  cfL*  'if 

***>•*"  , > >  *  -  s',  •  <  ty,  ^ 

Cjo 


ilndeed,  Allah  took  the  covenant  from  the  Children  of  Israel 
(Jews),  and  We  appointed  twelve  leaders  among  them.  And 
Allah  said:  I  am  zoith  you  if  you  perform  As-Salah  and  give 
Zakdh  and  believe  in  My  Messengers;  honor  and  assist  them, 
and  lend  a  good  loan  to  Allah,  verily,  I  will  expiate  your  sins 
and  admit  you  to  Gardens  under  which  rivers  flow  (in 
Paradise)}  (5:12).” 

Other  scholars  said,  “The  covenant  is  what  Allah  took  from 
them  in  the  Tawrah,  in  that.  He  will  send  a  great  Prophet  - 
meaning  Muhammad  jg  -  from  among  the  offspring  of  Ismail, 
who  will  be  obeyed  by  all  peoples.  Therefore,  whoever  obeys 
him,  then  Allah  will  forgive  his  sins,  enter  him  into  Paradise 
and  award  him  two  rewards.”  We  should  mention  here  that  Ar- 
Razi  mentioned  several  cases  of  information  brought  by  the 
earlier  Prophets  regarding  the  coming  of  Muhammad  & 
Further,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  said  that, 


11  *  At-Jabari  1 :555  &  557. 
121  At-Jabari  1 :109. 


207 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Part-1 ) _ 

}And  fulfill  (your  obligations  to)  My  covenant  (with  you)} 

means,  “His  covenant  with  His  servants  is  to  embrace  Islam 
and  to  adhere  to  it.”*11  Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 
“  ‘I  fulfill  My  obligations  to  you’  means,  ‘I  (Allah)  will  be  pleased 
with  you  and  admit  you  into  Paradise.  ”’,2,  As-Suddi,  Ad- 
Dahhak,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  and  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  said  similarly. 
Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  Allah’s  statement, 

iAndfear  Me  and  Me  alone.} 

means,  “Fear  the  torment  that  I  might  exert  on  you,  just  as  I 
did  with  your  fathers,  like  the  mutation,  etc.”*31  This  Ayah 
contains  encouragement,  followed  by  warning.  Allah  first  called 
the  Children  of  Israel,  using  encouragement,  then  He  warned 
them,  so  that  they  might  return  to  the  Truth,  follow  the 
Messenger  jg,  heed  the  Qur’an’s  prohibitions  and  commands 
and  believe  in  its  content.  Surely,  Allah  guides  whom  He  wills 
to  the  straight  path. 

Allah  said  next, 

4'fZ*  d.  uid  tj 

4 And  believe  in  what  I  have  sent  down,  confirming  that  which 
is  with  you  (the  Tawrah  and  the  Injil)} 

meaning,  the  Qur’an  that  Allah  sent  down  to  Muhammad  Si, 
the  unlettered  Arab  Prophet,  as  bringer  of  glad  tidings,  a 
wamer  and  a  light.  The  Qur’an  contains  the  Truth  from  Allah 
and  affirms  what  was  revealed  beforehand  in  the  Tawrah  and 
the  Injil  (the  Gospel).  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  said  that  Allah’s  statement, 

4(^2“  d  l»jdi  oJjd  Uj  \£j>ylj} 

}And  believe  in  what  I  have  sent  down  (this  Qur'an), 
confirming  that  which  is  with  you  (the  Tawrah  and  the  Injil)} 

“means,  ‘O  People  of  the  Book!  Believe  in  what  I  sent  down 
that  conforms  to  what  you  have.’  This  is  because  they  find  the 
description  of  Muhammad  jg  recorded  in  the  Tawrah  and  the 


m  At-Tabari  1 :558. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :143. 
*3*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :144. 


2Q8 _ Tafsir  Ibn  Katlnr 

Injll.”  Similar  statements  were  attributed  to  Mujahid,  Ar-Rabl‘ 
bin  Anas  and  Qatadah.'1' 

Allah  said, 

i‘%  $  VP 

4and  be  not  the  first  to  disbelieve  therein}. 

Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented,  “Do  not  become  the  first  to  disbelieve 
in  the  Qur’an  (or  Muhammad  5~j ,  while  you  have  more 
knowledge  in  it  than  other  people. ”|21  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah 
commented,  “Do  not  become  the  first  to  disbelieve  in 
Muhammad,’  meaning  from  among  the  People  of  the  Book, 
‘after  you  hear  that  he  was  sent  as  a  Prophet.’”13'  Similar 
statements  were  attributed  to  Al-Hasan,  As-Suddi  and  Ar-Rabl‘ 
bin  Anas.'4'  Ibn  Jarir  stated  that  the  Ayah  (disbelieve  therein 
2:41)  refers  to  the  Qur’an,  mentioned  earlier  in  the  Ayah, 

4 in  what  l  have  sent  down  (this  Qur'an),} 

Both  statements  are  correct  because  they  are  inter-related. 
For  instance,  whoever  disbelieves  in  the  Qur’an  will  have 
disbelieved  in  Muhammad  and  whoever  disbelieves  in 
Muhammad  will  have  disbelieved  in  the  Qur’an.  Allah’s 
statement, 

i‘7i 

4  the  first  to  disbelieve  therein} 

means,  do  not  become  the  first  among  the  Children  of  Israel  to 
disbelieve  in  it,  for  there  were  people  from  Quraysh  and  the 
Arabs  in  general  who  rejected  Muhammad  sfe  before  the  People 
of  the  Book  disbelieved  in  him.  We  should  state  here  that  the 
Ayah  is  talking  about  the  Children  of  Israel  in  specific,  because 
the  Jews  in  Al-Madlnah  were  the  first  among  the  Children  of 
Israel  to  be  addressed  by  the  Qur’an.  Hence,  their  disbelief  in 
the  Qur’an  means  that  they  were  the  first  among  the  People  of 
the  Book  to  disbelieve  in  it. 


'''  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :145. 
121  Ibid. 

131  Ibid. 

141  Ibid. 


209 


Surah  2.  AI-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Part-1) _ 

Allah’s  statement, 

4^4  0  i$k  UB  •);} 

iand  buy  not  with  My  verses  a  small  price,} 

means,  “Do  not  substitute  faith  in  My  Ayat  and  belief  in  My 
Prophet  with  the  life  of  this  world  and  its  lusts  which  are 
minute  and  bound  to  end.”  Allah  said, 


iand  have  Tacpvd  of  Me  and  Me  alone}. 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  reported  that  Talq  bin  Habib  said,  “Taqwa  is 
to  work  in  Allah’s  obedience,  on  a  light  from  Allah,  hoping  in 
Allah’s  mercy,  and  to  avoid  Allah’s  disobedience,  on  a  light 
from  Allah,  fearing  Allah’s  punishment.”1 11  Allah’s  statement, 


iand  fear  Me  and  Me  alone} 


means,  that  Allah  warns  the  People  of  the  Book  against 
intentionally  hiding  the  truth  and  spreading  the  opposite  of  it, 
as  well  as,  against  defying  the  Messenger  jg. 


jy'ij  \jX~4j  .1*., CyB  [yr&j  ^j} 


442.  And  mix  not  truth  with  falsehood,  nor  conceal  the  truth 
ivhile  you  know  (the  truth).} 

443.  And  perform  As-SalcUt,  and  give  Zakdh,  and  bow  down 
along  with  Ar-Raki'iti .} 


The  Prohibition  of  hiding  the  Truth  and  distorting  It 
with  Falsehood 


Allah  forbade  the  Jews  from  intentionally  distorting  the  truth 
with  falsehood  and  from  hiding  the  truth  and  spreading 
falsehood, 


4  t » ,  jljQt  yS4 


4 And  mix  not  truth  with  falsehood,  nor  conceal  the  truth  while 


111  Ibid.  1  : 147. 


220 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 


you  know  (the  truth)}. 

So  Allah  forbade  them  from  two  things;  He  ordered  them  to 
make  the  truth  known,  as  well  as  explaining  it.  Ad-Dahhak 
said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  mentioned  the  Ayah, 

iAnd  mix  not  truth  with  falsehood}  and  said;  “Do  not  mix  the 
truth  with  falsehood  and  the  facts  with  lies.”1 11  Qatadah  said 
that, 


}And  mix  not  truth  with  falsehood}  means,  “Do  not  mix  Judaism 
and  Christianity  with  Islam, 


iwhile  you  know  (the  truth).} 


that  the  religion  of  Allah  is  Islam,  and  that  Judaism  and 
Christianity  are  innovations  that  did  not  come  from  Allah. 

It  was  reported  that  Al-Hasan  Al-Basri  said  similarly.131 

Also,  Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  narrated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said 
that, 


inor  conceal  the  truth  while  you  know  (the  truth).} 

means,  “Do  not  hide  the  knowledge  that  you  have  of  My 
Messenger  and  what  he  was  sent  with.  His  description,  which  you 
know  about,  can  be  found  written  in  the  Books  that  you  have.”141 

It  is  possible  that  it  means,  “..although  you  know  the 
tremendous  harm  that  this  evil  will  cause  people,  misguiding 
them  and  leading  them  to  the  Fire,  because  they  will  follow 
the  falsehood  that  you  mixed  with  the  truth  in  your  claims.” 


‘Jty  1 yW'  \jLpj} 


iAnd  perform  As-Saldt  and  give  Zakalt,  and  bow  down  along 
with  Ar-Rdki'in.} 

111  At-Tabari  1 :569. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :147. 

131  Ibid. 

141  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :148. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Part-1) _ 211 

Muqatil  said,  “Allah’s  statement  to  the  People  of  the  Book, 


iAnd  perform  As-Salah ^  commands  them  to  perform  the  prayer 
behind  the  Prophet 

<w 


iand  give  Zakdh }  commands  them  to  pay  the  Zakdh  to  the 
Prophet  jg,  and 


iand  bow  down  along  with  Ar-Raki'in ^  commands  them  to  bow 
down  with  those  who  bow  down  among  the  Ummah  of 
Muhammad  j&.  Allah  therefore  commands  the  People  of  the 
Book  to  be  with,  and  among  the  Ummah  of  Muhammad  ag.”*1* 
In  addition,  Allah’s  statement, 

4.S& S>'  £ 


iAtid  bcnv  down  along  ivith  Ar-Raki'in}  means,  “And  be  among 
the  believers  performing  the  best  deeds  they  perform,  such  as, 
and  foremost,  the  prayer.”  Many  scholars  said  that  this  Ayah 
(2:43)  is  proof  for  the  obligation  of  performing  the  prayer  in 
congregation  (for  men  only).  I  will  explain  this  ruling  in  detail  in 
Kitab  Al-Ahkam  Al-Kabir,  Allah  willing. 


i44.  Enjoin  you  Al-Birr  (piety  and  righteousness  and  every  act 
of  obedience  to  Allah)  on  the  people  and  you  forget  (to  practise 
it)  yourselves,  while  you  recite  the  Scripture  (Tawrah))!  Have 
you  then  no  sense?} 


The  Condemnation  of  commanding  Others  to  observe 
Righteousness  while  ignoring  Righteousness 

Allah  said,  “How  is  it,  O  People  of  the  Book,  that  you 
command  people  to  perform  Al-Birr,  which  encompasses  all 
types  of  righteousness,  yet  forget  yourselves  and  do  not  heed 
what  you  call  others  to?  And  you  read  Allah’s  Book  (the 

m 


Al-Kashaf  1 :133. 


212 _ Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

Tawrah)  and  know  what  it  promises  to  those  who  do  not  fulfill 
Allah’s  commandments. 

iHave  you  then  no  sense?} 

of  what  you  are  doing  to  yourselves,  so  that  you  might  become 
aware  of  your  slumber  and  restore  your  sight  from  blindness?” 
‘Abdur-Razzaq  said  that  Ma'mar  stated  that  Qatadah 
commented  on  Allah’s  statement, 

iEnjoin  you  Al-Birr  (piety  and  righteousness  and  every  act  of 
obedience  to  Allah)  on  the  people  and  you  forget  (to  practise  it) 
yourselves,} 

“The  Children  of  Israel  used  to  command  people  to  obey  Allah, 
fear  Him  and  perform  Al-Birr.  Yet,  they  contradicted  these 
orders,  so  Allah  reminded  them  of  this  fact.”11*  As-Suddi  said 
similarly.  Ibn  Jurayj  said  that  the  Ayah : 

i’Ji 

iEnjoin  you  Al-Birr  on  the  people}  “Is  about  the  People  of  the 
Book  and  the  hypocrites.  They  used  to  command  people  to  pray 
and  fast.  However,  they  did  not  practice  what  they  commanded 
others.  Allah  reminded  them  of  this  behavior.  So  whoever 
commands  people  to  do  righteousness,  let  him  be  among  the 
first  of  them  to  implement  that  command.”*2*  Also,  Muhammad 
bin  Ishaq  narrated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that, 

4 And  you  forget  yourselves,} 
means,  “You  forget  to  practice  it  yourselves, 

5#  pj} 

iWhile  you  recite  the  Scripture  (Tawrdh)l  Have  you  theti  no 
sense?} 

You  forbid  the  people  from  rejecting  the  prophethood  and  the 


*'*  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  1 :44. 
121  At-Tabari  2 :8 . 


233 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (25  -  49)  (Part-1) 


covenant  that  you  have  mentioned  with  you  in  the  Tawrah, 
while  you  yourselves  have  forgoten  it,  meaning  that  *you  have 
forgotten  the  covenant  that  I  made  with  you  that  you  will 
accept  My  Messenger.  You  have  breeched  My  covenant,  and 
rejected  what  you  know  is  in  My  Book.’  ”*** 

Therefore,  Allah  admonished  the  Jews  for  this  behavior  and 
alerted  them  to  the  wrongs  that  they  were  perpetrating  against 
themselves  by  ordering  righteousness,  yet  refraining 
themselves  from  righteousness.  We  should  state  that  Allah  is 
not  criticizing  the  People  of  the  Book  for  ordering 
righteousness,  because  enjoining  good  is  a  part  of 
righteousness  and  is  an  obligation  for  the  scholars.  However, 
the  scholar  is  himself  required  to  heed,  and  adhere  to,  what 
he  invites  others  to.  For  instance,  Prophet  Shu'ayb  said, 


a 4  4*  ^ 


41  wish  not,  in  contradiction  to  you,  to  do  that  which  l  forbid 
you.  I  only  desire  reform  to  the  best  of  my  power.  And  my 
guidance  cannot  come  except  from  Allah,  in  Him  I  trust  and 
unto  Him  /  repent >  (11:88). 


Therefore,  enjoining  righteousness  and  performing 
righteousness  are  both  required.  Neither  category  is  rendered 
not  necessary  by  the  practice  of  the  other,  according  to  the 
most  correct  view  of  the  scholars  among  the  Salaf 
(predecessors)  and  the  Khalaf.'21 

Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  Abu  Wa’il  said,  “While  I  was 
riding  behind  Usamah,  he  was  asked,  ‘Why  not  advise 
‘Uthman?’  He  said,  “Do  you  think  that  if  I  advise  him  I  should 
allow  you  to  hear  it?  I  advise  him  in  secret,  and  I  will  not  start 
something  that  I  would  hate  to  be  the  first  to  start.  I  will  not 
say  to  a  man,  “You  are  the  best  man,’  even  if  he  was  my 
leader,  after  what  I  heard  from  the  Messenger  of  Allah  j&.’ 
They  said,  What  did  he  say?’  He  said,  1  heard  him  say, 


111  At-Tabari  2  :7. 

The  scholars  who  came  after  the  first  three  generations  of  Islam . 


214 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


pJi  i»  u  jilii  ,Jj*i  ^  ' 1  b^^ji  j j Jj 

4jl  ^  ujj yiUt  fo\  ci5  :  J^iui  ^ 1  j  oj^x^JU  U^»tj 

av;i}  ^  ^1; 


«A  titan  will  be  brought  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection  and  thrown 
in  the  Fire.  His  intestines  will  fall  out  and  he  will  continue 
circling  pulling  them  behind  him,  just  as  the  donkey  goes 
around  the  pole.  The  people  of  the  Fire  will  go  to  that  man  and 
ask  him,  'What  happened  to  you?  Did  you  not  used  to 
command  us  to  do  righteous  acts  and  forbid  us  from  committing 
evil?'  He  will  say,  'Yes.  /  used  to  enjoin  righteousness,  but 
refrained  from  performing  righteousness,  and  I  used  to  forbid 
you  to  perform  from  evil  while  1  myself  did  it.  V” 

This  Hadith  was  also  recorded  by  Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim.11' 

Also,  Ibrahim  An-Nakhat  said,  “I  hesitate  in  advising  people 
because  of  three  Ayat. 


iEnjoin  you  Al-Birr  on  the  people  and  you  forget  (to  practise  it) 
yourselves}. 


1  ajjsj  {jajas  i  e  p.  \fx  & 


40  you  who  believe!  Why  do  you  say  that  which  you  do  not 
do?  Most  hateful  it  is  to  Allah  that  you  say  that  which  you  do 
not  do}  (61:2-3). ”*21 


And  Allah  informed  us  that  the  Prophet  Shu‘ayb  said, 

3U&  Cj  l&J  C  *$t  ij  0»  &  t  4  3  %} 

i±4  4»  ^  &  %  y 


41  wish  not,  in  contradiction  to  you,  to  do  that  which  I  forbid 
you.  I  only  desire  reform  to  the  best  of  my  power.  And  my 
guidance  cannot  come  except  from  Allah,  in  Him  I  trust  and 
unto  Him  I  repent}  (11:88). 


I1'  FathAl-Bari  6:381  and  Muslim  4:2291,  Ahmad  5:205. 
121  Al-Qurtubi  1 :367. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Parti} 


215 


ny  $  jM  ^  tip  ij&'S 

a$u>v  &  $ 


445.  And  seek  help  in  patience  and  As-Saldt  (the  prayer)  and 
truly,  it  is  extremely  heavy  and  hard  except  for  Al-Khdshi'in  .} 

446  (They  are  those)  who  are  certain  that  they  are  going  to 
meet  their  Lord,  and  that  unto  Him  they  are  going  to  return.} 


The  Support  that  comes  with  Patience  and  Prayer 

Allah  commanded  His  servants  to  use  patience  and  prayer  to 
acquire  the  good  of  this  life  and  the  Hereafter.  Muqatil  bin 
Hayyan  said  that  this  Ayah  means,  “Utilize  patience  and  the 
obligatory  prayer  in  seeking  the  Hereafter.  As  for  patience 
(here),  they  say  that  it  means  fasting.”111  There  are  similar 
texts  reported  from  Mujahid.  Al-Qurtubi  and  other  scholars 
commented,  “This  is  why  Ramadan  is  called  the  month  of 
patience,”121  as  is  mentioned  in  the  Hadlth  literature.  It  was 
also  said  that  ‘patience’  in  the  Ayah  means,  refraining  from 
evil,  and  this  is  why  ‘patience’  was  mentioned  along  with 
practicing  acts  of  worship,  especially  and  foremost,  the  prayer. 
Also,  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  narrated  that  ‘Umar  bin  Al-Khattab  said, 
“There  are  two  types  of  patience:  good  patience  when  the 
disaster  strikes,  and  a  better  patience  while  avoiding  the 
prohibitions  of  Allah.”  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  said  that  Al-Hasan  Al- 
Basri  was  reported  to  have  said  similarly.131 

Allah  then  said, 


4 And  As-Salah  (the  prayer).} 


The  prayer  is  one  of  the  best  means  of  assistance  for  firmly 
adhering  to  Allah’s  orders,  just  as  Allah  said; 


C/cl  SJ  Z  ft} 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:154. 
121  Al-Qurtubi  1 :372 
131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 : 1 55 . 


216 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 

iRecite  (O  Muhammad  sg)  what  has  been  revealed  to  you  of  the 
Book  (the  Qur'an),  and  perform  As-Saldlt.  Verily,  As-Saldh  (the 
prayer)  prevents  from  Al-Fahsha'  (i.e.  great  sins  of  every  kind), 
and  Al-Munkar  and  the  remembrance  of  (praising)  of  (you  by) 
Allah  is  greater  indeed $  (29:45). 

The  personal  pronoun  in  the  Ayah, 


4And  truly,  it  is  extremely  heavy  and  hard £ 

refers  to  prayer,  as  Mujahid  is  reported  to  have  said,  and  it 
was  also  the  choice  of  Ibn  Jarir.  It  is  possible  that  the 
pronoun  might  be  referring  to  the  advice  -  to  observe  patience 
and  the  prayer  -  mentioned  in  the  same  Ayah.  Similarly,  Allah 
said  about  Qarun  (Korah), 


Vj  ah 


iBut  those  wlw  had  been  given  (religious)  knowledge  said: 
"Woe  to  you!  The  reward  of  Allah  (in  the  Hereafter)  is  better 
for  those  who  believe  and  do  righteous  good  deeds,  and  this, 
none  shall  attain  except  As-Sdbirun  (the  patient). ">  (28:80). 


Also,  Allah  said, 

csj'  6ji  %  aI-JJ 


4The  good  deed  and  the  evil  deed  cannot  be  equal.  Repel  (the 
evil)  with  one  which  is  better  then  verily  he,  between  whom  and 
you  there  was  enmity,  (will  become)  as  though  he  was  a  close 
friend.  But  none  is  granted  it  (the  above  quality)  except  those 
who  are  patient  -  and  none  is  granted  it  except  the  owner  of 
the  great  portion  (of  happiness  in  the  Hereafter  and)  in  this 
world. ^  (41:34-35) 

meaning,  this  advice  is  only  implemented  by  those  who  are 
patient  and  the  fortunate.  In  any  case,  Allah’s  statement  here 
means,  prayer  is  heavy  and  burdensome’, 

4  jwii'  ji. 


4except  for  Al-Khashi'in 


227 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (25  -  49)  (Part-1) 


Ibn  Abi  Talhah  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented  on  this 
Ayah,  “They  (Al-Khashi‘m)  are  those  who  believe  in  what  Allah 
has  revealed.”^1' 

Allah’s  statement, 


lV 


iThey  are  those  ivho  are  certain  that  they  are  going  to  meet 
their  Lord,  and  that  unto  Him  they  are  going  to  return.} 

continues  the  subject  that  was  started  in  the  previous  Ayah. 
Therefore,  the  prayer,  or  the  advice  to  observe  it  is  heavy, 


4  -  *}  ■  |*r j  rr^ 


4 except  far  Al-Khdshi'fn .  (They  are  those)  who  are  certain 
(Yazunmina)  that  they  are  going  to  meet  their  Lord,} 

meaning,  they  know  that  they  will  be  gathered  and  face  their 
Lord  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection, 

ik *4\ 


4and  that  unto  Him  they  are  going  to  return.} 

meaning,  their  affairs  are  all  subject  to  His  will  and  He  justly 
decides  what  He  wills.  Since  they  are  certain  that  they  will  be 
returned  to  Allah  and  be  reckoned,  it  is  easy  for  them  to 
perform  the  acts  of  obedience  and  refrain  from  the 
prohibitions.  Ibn  Jarir  commented  on  Allah’s  statement; 


4^ 


iYazunnuna  that  they  are  going  to  meet  their  Lord} 

Ibn  Janr  said;  “The  Arabs  call  certainty  as  well  as  doubt, 
Zann.  There  are  similar  instances  in  the  Arabic  language 
where  a  subject  as  well  as  its  opposite  share  the  same  name. 
For  instance,  Allah  said, 


jllli  \tjj} 


4And  the  Mujrimun  (criminals,  polytheists,  sinners),  shall  see 
the  Fire  and  Zannit  (apprehend)  that  they  have  to  fall 
therein}"(  18:53). 

It  is  recorded  in  the  Sahih  that  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection, 


m 


At-Tabari  2:16. 


2 18 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Allah  will  say  to  a  servant,  “Have  I  not  allowed  you  to  marry, 
honored  you,  made  the  horses  and  camels  subservient  to  you 
and  allowed  you  to  become  a  chief  and  a  master?”  He  will  say, 
“Yes.”  Allah  will  say,  “Did  you  have  Zann  (think)  that  you  will 
meet  Me?”  He  will  say,  “No.”  Allah  will  say,  “This  Day,  I  will 
forget  you,  just  as  you  forgot  Me.”*1*  If  Allah  wills,  we  will 
further  elaborate  on  this  subject  when  we  explain  Allah’s 
statement, 

at  \& 

4They  have  forgotten  Allah,  so  He  has  forgotten  thetn}  (9:67). 

i'&UM  X&t 


447.  O  Children  of  Israel!  Remember  My  favor  which  I 
bestowed  upon  you  and  that  I  preferred  you  over  the  ‘ Alamin 
(nations)} 


Reminding  the  Children  of  Israel  that  They  were 
preferred  above  the  Other  Nations 

Allah  reminds  the  Children  of  Israel  of  the  favors  that  He 
granted  their  fathers  and  grandfathers,  how  He  showed 
preference  to  them  by  sending  them  Messengers  from  among 
them  and  revealing  Books  to  them,  more  so  than  any  of  the 
other  previous  nations.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 

4 And  Wc  chose  them  (the  Children  of  Israel)  over  the  ‘ Alamin , 
(nations)  with  knowledge.}  (44:32)  and, 


jil  iUo  'j 

4  '•'(jfi-)'  lA  ^ 


-a. A 


4And  (remember)  when  Musa  (Moses)  said  to  his  people:  "O 
my  people!  Remetnber  the  favor  of  Allah  to  you :  when  He  made 
Prophets  among  you,  made  you  kings,  honored  you  above  the 
'Alamin  (nations).”}  (5:20). 

Abu  Ja‘far  Ar-Razi  reported  that  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  said  that 


111  Muslim  4:2279. 


219 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Part-1) _ 

Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  said  that  Allah’s  statement, 

iand  that  I  preferred  you  over  the  ' Alamin }  means,  “The  kingship, 
Messengers  and  Books  that  were  granted  to  them,  instead  of 
granting  such  to  the  other  kingdoms  that  existed  during  their 
time,  for  every  period  there  is  a  nation.”111  It  was  also  reported 
that  Mujahid,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas,  Qatadah  and  Ismail  bin  Abi 
Khalid  said  similarly.121 


The  Ummah  of  Muhammad  is  Better  than  the 
Children  of  Israel 


This  is  the  only  way  the  Ayah  can  be  understood,  because 
this  Ummah  is  better  than  theirs,  as  Allah  said; 


%  &&  fUS  $  JypX  ^ 


iYou  are  the  best  of  people  ever  raised  up  for  mankind;  you 
enjoin  good  and  forbid  evil,  and  you  believe  in  Allah.  And  had 
the  People  of  the  Book  (jews  and  Christians)  believed,  it  would 
have  been  better  for  them}  (3:1 10). 


Also,  the  Musnad  and  Sunan  Collections  of  Hadith  recorded 
that  Mu'awiyah  bin  Haydah  Al-Qushayri  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  sg  said, 


•ji* i  JU  u* 


r' 


tSl 


:  :  si  * 


11  You  (Muslims)  are  the  seventieth  nation,  but  you  are  the  best 
and  most  honored  of  them  according  to  Allah.  »131 

There  are  many  Hadiths  on  this  subject,  and  they  will  be 
mentioned  when  we  discuss  Allah’s  statement, 


}You  are  the  best  of  peoples  ever  raised  up  for  mankind } 
(3:110). 


,U  %  vj  iiii  £• 


ll]  At-Tabari  2:24. 

^  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :158. 

131  Ahmad  5 :3 ,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8 :352 ,  and  Ibn  Majah  2  : 1433 . 


220 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


T 

448.  And  fear  a  Day  (of  Judgement)  when  a  person  shall  not 
avail  anotlter,  nor  will  intercession  be  accepted  from  him ,  nor 
will  compensation  be  taken  from  him,  nor  will  they  be  helped.} 

After  Allah  reminded  the  Children  of  Israel  of  the  favors  that 
He  has  granted  them,  He  warned  them  about  the  duration  of 
the  torment  which  He  will  punish  them  with  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection.  He  said, 

4Cy  \fiff} 


4And  fear  a  Day}  meaning,  the  Day  of  Resurrection, 

4When  a  person  shall  not  avail  another}  meaning,  on  that  Day,  no 
person  shall  be  of  any  help  to  another.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


4And  no  bearer  of  burdens  shall  bear  another's  burden}  (35:18) 


4  ^  hr*,  rr-i  ^4^ 

4Every  man  that  Day  will  have  enough  to  make  him  careless  of 
others.}  (80:37)  and, 


y  j t  j*  .;Jl»  if  V  Uj;  pSvj  W  u-12' 


40  mankind!  Have  Taqwa  of  your  Lord  (by  keeping  your  duty 
to  Him  and  avoiding  all  evil),  and  fear  a  Day  when  no  father 
can  avail  aught  for  his  son,  nor  a  son  avail  aught  for  his 
father}  (31:33). 

This  indeed  should  serve  as  a  great  warning  that  both  the 
father  and  the  son  will  not  be  of  help  to  each  other  on  that 
Day. 


Neither  Intercession,  Ransom,  or  Assistance  will  be 
accepted  on  behalf  of  the  Disbelievers 

Allah  said, 


«£&  &l;  h>} 


222 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49}  (Parti) 


inor  will  intercession  be  accepted  from  him } 
meaning,  from  the  disbelievers.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


4 So  mo  intercession  of  intercessors  will  be  of  any  use  to  them >  (74:48) 
and  described  the  people  of  the  Fire  saying, 


4Nou?  zoe  have  no  intercessors.  Nor  a  close  friend  (to  help  us)} 
(26:100-101). 

Allah’s  statement  here  (2:48) 


4«or  will  compensation  be  taken  from  him}  means,  that  Allah  does 
not  accept  the  disbelievers  to  ransom  themselves.  Similarly, 
Allah  said, 


iVerily,  those  who  disbelieved,  and  died  while  they  were 
disbelievers,  the  (whole)  earth  full  of  gold  will  not  be  accepted 
from  anyone  of  them  even  if  they  offered  it  as  a  ransom}  (3:91) 


oi  ij-UiJ  j&Saj  tjjyV'  jt,  d  6^ 

ft  3$  t 


iVerily,  those  who  disbelieve,  if  they  had  all  that  is  in  the 
earth,  and  as  much  again  therewith  to  ransom  themselves  from 
the  torment  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection,  it  would  never  be 
accepted  of  them,  and  theirs  would  be  a  painful  torment}  (5:36) 

iXlt  •)-u>  j} 


}And  even  if  he  offers  every  ransom,  it  will  not  be  accepted 
from  him}  (6:70)  and, 


for  \r:< 


iSo  this  Day  no  ransom  shall  be  taken  from  you  (hypocrites), 
nor  of  those  who  disbelieved.  Your  abode  is  the  Fire.  That  is 
your  Mawld  (friend  -  proper  place)}  (57:15). 


223 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (25  -  49)  (Part-1) 


iThen  why  did  those 
whom  they  had  taken  for 
alihah  (gods)  besides  Al¬ 
lah,  as  a  way  of  ap¬ 
proach  (to  Allah)  not 
help  them?  Nay,  but 
they  vanished  completely 
from  them }  (46:28). 

Also,  Ad-Dahhak 
said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
said  that  Allah’s 
statement, 

i"What  is  the  matter 
with  you?  Why  do  you 
not  help  one  another?"} 
(37:25) 

means,  “This  Day, 
you  shall  not  have  a 
refuge  from  Us.  Not 
this  Day.”1'1  Ibn  Jarir 
said  that  Allah’s 
statement, 


a  51  V, 

A*  >  *  -  i- _  '  .*.  ^ 

j  *\j  ^  j* 

it  j  ^ 

i *jSo  JAJ t  JVjdjt 

0  Hj 

^==iljS\  3  6  j)J 

jiSojVj  iliiv 

✓  ^  .S  ''  ''yS  ^  ^ 

•/-f?-  ad  t  kSj  Cr 

|r  fjp  j  t 

Cf^  Oj^w^  J*  jJJ 

6  44ioil |#2oi£tij  o3"t^3toG^jf  £J( 

^  Uj£jia> a~>1  \y £'^>3 j iTylikUj 


4  nor  u>///  f/iey  be  helped.} 


meaning,  on  that  Day,  they  shall  neither  be  helped  by  any 
helper,  nor  shall  anyone  intercede  on  their  behalf.  No  repeal  or 
ransom  will  be  accepted  for  them,  all  courtesy  towards  them 
will  have  ceased,  along  with  any  helpful  intercession.  No  type 
of  help  or  cooperation  will  be  available  for  them  on  that  Day. 
The  judgment  will,  on  that  Day,  be  up  to  the  Most  Great,  the 
Most  Just,  against  whom  no  intercessor  or  helper  can  ever 
assist.  He  will  then  award  the  evil  deed  its  kind  and  will 
multiply  the  good  deeds.  This  is  similar  to  Allah’s  statement, 


4f$ijXlx  yS\ 


IM 


At-Tabari  2  :36 


224 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kqtlur 

iBut  stop  them,  verily,  they  arc  to  be  questioned.  " What  is  the 
matter  with  you?  Why  do  you  not  help  one  another?”  Nay,  but 
that  Day  they  shall  surrender }  (37:24-26).1'1 


449.  And  (remember)  when  We  delivered  you  from  Fir' awn's 
(Pharaoh)  people,  who  were  afflicting  you  with  a  horrible 
torment,  killing  your  sons  and  sparing  your  women,  and 
therein  was  a  mighty  trial  from  your  Lord .  ^ 

450.  And  (remember)  when  We  separated  the  sea  for  you  and 
saved  you  and  drowned  Fir' awn’s  (Pharaoh)  people  while  you 
were  watching. $ 


The  Children  of  Israel  were  saved  from  Pharaoh  and  His 
Army  Who  drowned 


Allah  said  to  the  Children  of  Israel,  “Remember  My  favor  on 
you 


& 


4 And  (remember)  when  We  delivered  you  from  Fir' awn's 
(Pharaoh)  people,  who  were  afflicting  you  with  a  horrible 
torment 

meaning,  ‘I  -  Allah  -  saved  you  from  them  and  delivered  you 
from  their  hands  in  the  company  of  Musa,  after  they  subjected 
you  to  horrible  torture.’  This  favor  came  after  the  cursed 
Pharaoh  had  a  dream  in  which  he  saw  a  fire  emerge  from  Bayt 
Al-Maqdis  (Jerusalem),  and  then  the  fire  entered  the  houses  of 
the  Coptics  in  Egypt,  with  the  exception  of  the  Children  of 
Israel.  Its  purport  was  that  his  kingship  would  be  toppled  by  a 
man  among  the  Children  of  Israel.  It  was  also  said  that  some 
of  Pharaoh’s  entourage  said  that  the  Children  of  Israel  were 
expecting  a  man  among  them  to  arise  who  would  establish  a 
state  for  them.  We  will  mention  the  Hadith  on  this  subject 


m 


At-Tabari  2 :35 . 


when  we  explain  Surat  Ta  Ha  (20),  Allah  willing.  After  the 
dream,  Pharaoh  ordered  that  every  newborn  male  among  the 
Children  of  Israel  be  killed  and  that  the  girls  be  left  alone.  He 
also  commanded  that  the  Children  of  Israel  be  given  tasks  of 
hard  labor  and  assigned  the  most  humiliating  jobs. 

The  torment  here  refers  to  killing  the  male  infants.  In  Surat 
Ibrahim  (14)  this  meaning  is  clearly  mentioned, 

iWho  were  afflicting  you  with  horrible  torment,  and  were 
slaughtering  your  sons  and  letting  your  women  live.}  (14:6). 

We  will  explain  this  Ayah  in  the  beginning  of  Surat  Al-Qasas 
(28),  Allah  willing,  and  our  reliance  and  trust  are  with  Him, 

The  meaning  of, 

iwho  were  afflicting  you }  is,  “They  humiliated  you,”  as  Abu 
TJbaydah  stated.  It  was  also  said  that  it  means,  “They  used  to 
exaggerate  in  tormenting  you”  according  to  Al-Qurtubi.  As  for 
Allah  saying, 

ikilling  your  sons  and  sparing  your  women}  that  explains  His 
statement, 

iwho  were  afflicting  you  with  horrible  torment}  then  it  explains  the 
meaning  of  the  favor  He  gave  them,  as  mentioned  in  His 
statement, 

4&  13  $  ^  !#»> 

iRemember  My  favor  which  I  bestowed  upon  you As  for  what 
Allah  said  in  Surat  Ibrahim, 

4$  ir^i 

4 And  remind  them  of  the  annals  of  Allah ^  (14:5)  meaning,  the 
favors  and  blessing  He  granted  them,  He  then  said, 

4^-H,  $'.0  P>y>p^ 

4Who  were  afflicting  you  with  horrible  torment,  and  were 


226 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


slaughtering  your  sons  and  letting  your  women  live.}  (14:6) 

So  Allah  mentioned  saving  their  children  from  being 
slaughtered  in  order  to  remind  them  of  the  many  favors  that 
He  granted  them. 

We  should  state  here  that  ‘Pharaoh’  (Fir'awn)  is  a  title  that 
was  given  to  every  disbelieving  king  who  ruled  Egypt,  whether 
from  the  ‘Amallq  (Canaanites)  or  otherwise,  just  as  Caesar 
(Qaysar)  is  the  title  of  the  disbelieving  kings  who  ruled  Rome 
and  Damascus.  Also,  Khosrau  (Kisra)  is  the  title  of  the  kings 
who  ruled  Persia,  while  Tubb'a  is  the  title  of  the  kings  of 
Yemen,  and  the  kings  of  Abyssinia  (Ethiopia)  were  called 
Negus  (An-Najashi). 

Allah  said, 

fej  *  3L4  & 

iAtid  therein  ivas  a  mighty  trial  from  your  Lord.} 

Ibn  Jarir  commented  that  this  part  of  the  Ayah  means,  “Our 
saving  your  fathers  from  the  torment  that  they  suffered  by  the 
hand  of  Pharaoh,  is  a  great  blessing  from  your  Lord.”111  We 
should  mention  that  in  the  blessing  there  a  is  test,  the  same 
as  with  hardship,  for  Allah  said, 

$And  We  shall  make  a  trial  of  you  with  evil  and  with  good} 
(21:35)  and, 


iAtid  We  tried  them  with  good  (blessings)  and  evil  (calamities) 
in  order  that  they  might  turn  (to  obey  Allah.)}  (7:168). 

Allah’s  statement  next. 


iAnd  (remember)  when  We  separated  the  sea  for  you  and  saved 
you  and  drowned  Fir'awn's  (Pharaoh)  people  while  you  were 
watching} 

means,  ‘After  We  saved  you  from  Fir'awn  and  you  escaped 
with  Musa;  Fir'awn  went  out  in  your  pursuit  and  We  parted 


m 


At-Tabari  2 :48 . 


227 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  (TtorM) 

the  sea  for  you/  Allah  mentioned  this  story  in  detail,  as  we 
will  come  to  know,  Allah  willing.  One  of  the  shortest  references 
to  this  story  is  Allah's  statement, 


4 And  saved  you}  meaning,  “We  saved  you  from  them,  drowning 
them  while  you  watched,  bringing  relief  to  your  hearts  and 
humiliation  to  your  enemy.” 


Fasting  the  Day  of  €Ashurdf 

It  was  reported  that  the  day  the  Children  of  Israel  were 
saved  from  Fir‘awn  was  called  the  day  of  * Ashura \  Imam 
Ahmad  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  came  to  Al-Madlnah  and  found  that  the  Jews  were 
fasting  the  day  of  ‘Ashura’.  He  asked  them,  “What  is  this  day 
that  you  fast?”  They  said,  “This  is  a  good  day  during  which 
Allah  saved  the  Children  of  Israel  from  their  enemy,  and  Musa 
used  to  fast  this  day.”  The  Messenger  of  Allah  sg  said, 


«/  have  more  right  to  Musa  than  you  have .» 

So  the  Messenger  of  Allah  ££  fasted  that  day  and  ordered  that 
it  be  fasted.  This  Hadith  was  collected  by  Al-Bukhari,  Muslim, 
An-Nasal  and  Ibn  Majah.(1) 


^  4/  /  /  |  »  >  4  |  *  .  v  m  /  f  ^  y  I  /  ^  */  **  ^  f  \ 

\jyLC,  y.  OWjl 

J-ji  lilfo  ij j  JU'i  -CJ  ji  pScx- 


<$51.  And  (remember)  when  We  appointed  for  Miisd  (Moses) 
forty  nights ,  and  (in  his  absence)  you  took  the  calf  (for  worship ), 
and  you  were  Zdlimun  (polytheists  and  wrongdoers).} 

452.  Then  after  that  We  forgave  you  so  that  you  wight  be 
grateful.} 

453.  And  (remember)  whett  We  gave  Miisd  the  Scripture  (the 
Tawrdix))  and  the  criterion  (of  right  and  wrong)  so  that  you 


^  Ahmad  1  :291 ,  Fath  Al-Bari  4:287,  Muslim  2  :796,  An-Nasal  in  Al- 
Kubra  2  :157,  and  Ibn  Majah  1  :553. 


228 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


may  be  guided  aright .} 


The  Children  of  Israel  worshipped  the  Calf 

Allah  then  said,  “Remember  My  favor  on  you  when  I  forgave 
you  for  worshipping  the  calf.”  This  happened  after  Musa  went 
to  the  meeting  place  with  his  Lord  at  the  end  of  that  period 
which  was  forty  days.  These  forty  days  were  mentioned  in 
Surat  Al-A'raf  when  Allah  said, 


4And  We  appointed  for  Musa  thirty  nights  and  added  (to  the 
period)  ten  (more)}  (7:142). 

It  was  said  that  these  days  were  during  the  month  of  Dhul- 
Qa'dah  plus  the  first  ten  days  in  Dhul-Hijjah,  after  the 
Children  of  Israel  were  delivered  from  Fir'awn  and  they  safely 
crossed  the  sea.  Allah’s  statement, 

4And  (remember)  when  We  gave  Musa  the  Scripture}  means,  the 
Tawrah, 


4And  the  criterion}  that  is  that  which  differentiates  between 
truth  and  falsehood,  guidance  and  deviation. 


p^} 


4So  that  you  may  be  guided  aright},  after  escaping  the  sea,  as 
another  Ayah  in  Surat  Al-A'raf  clearly  stated, 


4And  indeed  We  gave  Musa  -  after  We  }wd  destroyed  the 
generations  of  old  -  the  Scripture  (the  Tawrah)  as  an 
enlightenment  far  mankind,  and  a  guidance  and  a  mercy,  that 
they  might  remember  (or  receive  admonition)}  (28:43). 


dl  (£$1  is“J>  Jtt  ijj} 

ji  ft  \M 


454.  And  (remember)  when  Musa  said  to  his  people:  "O  my 


229 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  (Parti} 

people!  Verily,  you  have  wronged  yourselves  by  worshipping 
the  calf.  So  turn  in  repentance  to  your  Creator  and  kill 
yourselves  (the  innocent  kill  the  wrongdoers  among  you),  that 
will  be  better  for  you  with  your  Creator.”  Then  He  accepted 
your  repentance.  Truly,  He  is  the  One  Who  accepts  repentance, 
the  Most  Merciful. $ 


The  Children  of  Israel  kill  each  other  in  Repentance 


This  was  the  repentance  required  from  the  Children  of  Israel 
for  worshipping  the  calf.  Commenting  on  Allah’s  statement; 


4And  (remember)  when  Musa  said  to  his  people:  “ O  my  people! 
Verily,  you  have  wronged  yourselves  by  worshipping  the  calf.  Al- 
Hasan  Al-Basri  said,  “When  their  hearts  thought  of  worshipping 
the  calf, 


^£3  jtjt uj  l Hijj  p  ijd  IjJtt  ijii  j»  Ijljj 


4And  when  they  regretted  and  saw  that  they  had  gone  astray, 
they  (repented  and)  said :  "If  our  Lord  does  not  have  mercy 
upon  us  and  forgive  us”}  (7:149). 

This  is  when  Musa  said  to  them, 


jiiub  sye*} 


40  my  people!  Verily,  you  have  wronged  yourselves  by  worshipping 
the  calf...}.’*1*  Abu  ‘Al-‘Aliyah,  Said  bin  Jubayr  and  Ar-Rabi‘ 
bin  Anas  commented  on. 


4So  turn  in  repentance  to  your  Bari'}  that  it  means,  “To  your 
Creator.”*2^  Allah’s  statement, 


4 to  your  Bari '  (Creator)}  alerts  the  Children  of  Israel  to  the 
enormity  of  their  error  and  means,  “Repent  to  He  Who  created 
you  after  you  associated  others  with  Him  in  worship.” 

An-Nasa’i,  Ibn  Jarir  and  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  recorded  Ibn  ‘Abbas 


I1*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :167. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 : 167 , 168 . 


230 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

saying,  “Allah  told  the  Children  of  Israel  that  their  repentance 
would  be  to  slay  by  the  sword  every  person  they  meet,  be  he 
father  or  son.  They  should  not  care  whom  they  kill.  Those 
were  guilty  whom  Musa  and  Harun  were  not  aware  of  their 
guilt,  they  admitted  their  sin  and  did  as  they  were  ordered.  So 
Allah  forgave  both  the  killer  and  the  one  killed.”*1*  This  is  part 
of  the  Hadith  about  the  trials  that  we  will  mention  in  Surat  Ta 
Ha,  (20)  Allah  willing. 

Ibn  Jarir  narrated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Musa  said  to  his 
people, 

& 


S*  P  £  jfts 


4”  So  turn  in  repentance  to  your  Creator  and  kill  each  other  (the 
innocent  kill  the  wrongdoers  among  you),  that  will  be  better  far 
you  with  your  Creator.”  Tlten  He  accepted  your  repentance. 
Truly,  He  is  the  One  Who  accepts  repentance,  the  Most 
Merciful.} 


Allah  ordered  Musa  to  command  his  people  to  kill  each 
other.  He  ordered  those  who  worshipped  the  calf  to  sit  down 
and  those  who  did  not  worship  the  calf  to  stand  holding 
knives  in  their  hands.  When  they  started  killing  them,  a  great 
darkness  suddenly  overcame  them.  After  the  darkness  lifted, 
they  had  killed  seventy  thousand  of  them.  Those  who  were 
killed  among  them  were  forgiven,  and  those  who  remained 
alive  were  also  forgiven.”*2* 


fey  Jm 

455.  And  (remember)  loheti  you  said :  "O  Musa!  We  shall  never 
believe  in  you  until  we  see  Allah  plainly.”  But  you  were  seized 
with  a  bolt  of  lightning  while  you  were  looking }. 

456.  Then  We  raised  you  up  after  your  death,  so  that  you  might 
be  grateful.} 


*1*  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  6:404,  At-Tabari  18:306,  and  Ibn  Abi  Hatim 
1:168. 

*2*  At-Tabari  2:73. 


231 


Surah  2.  Al-Bagarah  (50  -  74)  (Pa±l) 


The  Best  among  the  Children  of  Israel  ask  to  see  Allah; 
their  subsequent  Death  and  Resurrection 


Allah  said,  ‘Remember  My  favor  on  you  for  resurrecting  you 
after  you  were  seized  with  lightning  when  you  asked  to  see  Me 
directly,  which  neither  you  nor  anyone  else  can  bear  or  attain.’ 
This  was  said  by  Ibn  Jurayj.  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  the  Ayah 


)And  (remember)  when  you  said:  "O  Musa  !  We  shall  never  believe 
in  you  until  zve  see  Alldlt  plainly.")  means,  “Publicly”,111  “So  that 
we  gaze  at  Allah.”121  Also,  TJrwah  bin  Ruwaym  said  that  Allah’s 
statement, 


iWhile  you  were  looking )  means,  “Some  of  them  were  struck 
with  lightning  while  others  were  watching.”131  Allah  resurrected 
those,  and  struck  the  others  with  lightning.  As-Suddi 
commented  on, 


)But  you  were  seized  zoith  a  bolt  of  lightning)  saying;  “They  died, 
and  Musa  stood  up  crying  and  supplicating  to  Allah,  ‘O  Lord! 
What  should  I  say  to  the  Children  of  Israel  when  I  go  back  to 
them  after  You  destroyed  the  best  of  them, 


i  %  &  c  %  35  $  *4 ')  ¥ 


4//  it  had  been  Your  zvill,  You  could  have  destroyed  them  and  me 
before ;  would  You  destroy  us  for  the  deeds  of  the  foolish  ones  among 
u$?Y  Allah  revealed  to  Musa  that  these  seventy  men  were 
among  those  who  worshipped  the  calf.  Afterwards,  Allah 
brought  them  back  to  life  one  man  at  a  time,  while  the  rest  of 
them  were  watching  how  Allah  was  bringing  them  back  to  life. 
That  is  why  Allah's  said, 


iThen  We  raised  you  up  after  your  death,  so  that  you  might  be 


111  At-Tabari  2:81. 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :170. 
131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :172. 


232 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katfur 


grateful  .y*1* 


Ar-Rabl*  bin  Anas  said,  “Death  was  their  punishment,  and 
they  were  resurrected  after  they  died  so  they  could  finish  out 
their  lives.”  Qatadah  said  similarly J2' 

_  ‘Abdur-Raljman  bin  Zayd  bin  Aslam  commented  on  this 
Ayah,  “Mftsa  returned  from  meeting  with  his  Lord  carrying  the 
Tablets  on  which  He  wrote  the  Tawrah.  He  found  that  they 
had  worshipped  the  calf  in  his  absence.  Consequently,  he 
commanded  them  to  kill  themselves,  and  they  complied,  and 
Allah  forgave  them.  He  said  to  them,  These  Tablets  have 
Allah’s  Book,  containing  what  He  commanded  you  and  what 
He  forbade  for  you.’  They  said,  ‘Should  we  believe  this 
statement  because  you  said  it?  By  Allah,  we  will  not  believe 
until  we  see  Allah  in  the  open,  until  He  shows  us  Himself  and 
says:  This  is  My  Book,  therefore,  adhere  to  it.  Why  does  He 
not  talk  to  us  as  He  talked  to  you,  O,  Musa?”’  Then  he 
(‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Zayd)  recited  Allah’s  statement, 


iii 


iWe  shall  never  believe  in  you  until  we  see  Allah  plainly >  and  said, 
“So  Allah’s  wrath  fell  upon  them,  a  thunderbolt  struck  them, 
and  they  all  died.  Then  Allah  brought  them  back  to  life  after  He 
killed  them.”  Then  he  (‘Abdur-Rahman)  recited  Allah’s 
statement, 


iThen  We  raised  you  up  after  your  death,  so  that  you  might  be 
grateful >,  and  said,  “Musa  said  to  them,  Take  the  Book  of 
Allah.’  They  said,  ‘No.’  He  said,  What  is  the  matter  with  you?’ 
They  said,  The  problem  is  that  we  died  and  came  back  to  life.’ 
He  said,  Take  the  Book  of  Allah.’  They  said,  ‘No.’  So  Allah  sent 
some  angels  who  made  the  mountain  topple  over  them.”,3! 

This  shows  that  the  Children  of  Israel  were  required  to  fulfill 
the  commandments  after  they  were  brought  back  to  life. 
However,  Al-Mawardy  said  that  there  are  two  opinions  about 
this  matter.  The  first  opinion  is  that  since  the  Children  of 


***  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :173. 
^  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :173. 
131  At-Jabari  2:88. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  (Parti} 


233 


Israel  witnessed  these  miracles,  they  were  compelled  to  believe, 
so  they  did  not  have  to  fulfill  the  commandments.  The  second 
opinion  states  that  they  were  required  to  adhere  to  the 
commandments,  so  that  no  responsible  adult  is  free  of  such 
responsibilities.  Al-Qurtubi  said  that  this  is  what  is  correct, 
because,  he  said,  although  the  Children  of  Israel  witnessed 
these  tremendous  calamities  and  incidents,  that  did  not  mean 
that  they  were  not  responsible  for  fulfilling  the  commandments 
any  more.  Rather  they  are  responsible  for  that,  and  this  is 
clear.  Allah  knows  best. 


Jt  CSj&tij  ,> Ujltj  fCjjf  j} 

i57.  And  We  shaded  you  with  clouds  and  sent  dmvn  on  you 
Al-Manna  and  the  quail,  (saying):  " Eat  of  the  good  lawful 
things  We  have  provided  for  you,”  (but  they  rebelled).  And 
they  did  not  wrong  Us  but  they  wronged  themselves .} 


The  Shade,  the  Manna  and  the  Quail 

After  Allah  mentioned  the  calamities  that  He  saved  the 
Children  of  Israel  from,  He  mentioned  the  favors  that  He 
granted  them,  saying, 

i'r&\  <Mj} 

iAnd  We  shaded  you  with  clouds}.  This  Ayah  mentions  the  white 
clouds  that  provided  shade  for  the  Children  of  Israel,  protecting 
them  from  the  sun’s  heat  during  their  years  of  wandering.  In 
the  Hadith  about  the  trials,  An-Nasa’i  recorded  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
saying,  Allah  shaded  the  Children  of  Israel  with  clouds  during 
the  years  of  wandering. ”*11  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  said,  “Narrations 
similar  to  that  of  Ibn  ‘Abbas  were  reported  from  Ibn  “Umar,  Ar- 
Rabl'  bin  Anas,  Abu  Mijlaz,  Ad-Dahhak,  and  As-Suddi.”*21  Al- 
Hasan  and  Qatadah  said  that, 

4 And  We  shaded  you  with  clouds}  “This  happened  when  they 
were  in  the  desert  and  the  clouds  shielded  them  from  the 


I1*  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  6 :405. 
Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :174. 


234 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

sun.”11'  Ibn  Jarir  said  that  several  scholars  said  that  the  type 
of  cloud  the  Ayah  mentioned,  “was  cooler  and  better  than  the 
type  we  know.”*2' 

‘Ali  bin  Abi  Talhah  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented  on 
Allah’s  statement, 

iAnd  sent  dmvn  on  you  Al-Manna},  “The  manna  used  to  descend 
to  them  to  the  trees,  and  they  used  to  eat  whatever  they  wished 
of  it.”  Also,  Qatadah  said,  “The  manna,  which  was  whiter  than 
milk  and  sweeter  than  honey,  used  to  rain  down  on  the 
Children  of  Israel,  just  as  the  snow  falls,  from  dawn  until 
sunrise.  One  of  them  would  collect  enough  for  that  particular 
day,  for  if  it  remained  more  than  that,  it  would  spoil.  On  the 
sixth  day,  Friday,  one  would  collect  enough  for  the  sixth  and 
the  seventh  day,  which  was  the  Sabbath  during  which  one 
would  not  leave  home  to  seek  his  livelihood,  or  for  anything 
else.  All  this  occurred  in  the  wilderness.”'3'  The  type  of  manna 
that  we  know  provides  sufficient  food  when  eaten  alone, 
because  it  is  nutritious  and  sweet.  When  manna  is  mixed  with 
water,  it  becomes  a  sweet  drink.  It  also  changes  composition 
when  mixed  with  other  types  of  food.  However,  this  is  not  the 
only  type.  The  evidence  to  this  fact  is  that  Al-Bukhari  narrated, 
that  Said  bin  Zayd  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jgj  said, 

ijjli  ujuj  ^  lUsdi» 

uKam'ah  (truffles)  is  a  type  of  manna,  and  its  liquid  is  a 
remedy  Jbr  the  eyes.”'4' 

This  Hadith  was  also  collected  by  Imam  Ahmad.  |5'  The 
group  of  Hadith  compilers,  with  the  exception  of  Abu  Dawud, 
also  collected  it,  and  At-Tirmidhi  graded  it  Hasan  Sahih .,6’  At- 
Tirmidhi  recorded  Abu  Hurayrah  saying  that  the  Messenger  of 

m  IbnAbiHatim  1:174. 

'2|  At-Jabari  2 :91 . 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:176. 

141  Fath  Al-Bari  8:14. 

151  Ahmad  1:187. 

'6'  Fath  Al-Bari  8:14,  Muslim  3:1619,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  6 :235 ,  An- 
Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  4  :370 ,  and  Ibn  Majah  2  : 1 143 . 


235 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (50  -  74)  (Parti} 


Allah  jg  said, 

*U-i  p-lJ  1  ^  »LLi  j  <L>Jl  ^  S^wUl1 


'‘The  'Ajwah  ( pressed ,  dried  date)  is  from  Paradise  and  it  cures 
poison,  Al-Kam'ah  (truffles)  is  a  form  of  manna,  and  its  liquid 
heals  the  eye."*  At-Tirmidhi  is  the  only  one  of  them  who 
recorded  this  Hadith 

As  for  the  quail  (Sailed)  in  question,  ‘Ali  bin  Abi  Talhah 
reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “The  ( Saliva )  is  a  bird  that  looks 
like  the  quail.”'2'  This  is  the  same  opinion  reported  from 
Mujahid,  Ash-Sha'bi,  Ad-Dahhak,  Al-Hasan,  Ucrimah  and  Ar- 
Rabi'  bin  Anas,  may  Allah  have  mercy  upon  them.*3*  Also, 
Hannah  said  that  the  Salwa  is  a  bird  in  Paradise  about  the 
size  of  a  sparrow.'4*  Qatadah  said  "The  Salwa  is  a  bird  that  is 
similar  to  a  sparrow.  During  that  time,  an  Israelite  could  catch 
as  many  quails  as  was  sufficient  for  that  particular  day, 
otherwise  the  meat  would  spoil.  On  the  sixth  day,  Friday,  he 
would  collect  what  is  enough  for  the  sixth  and  the  seventh 
day,  the  Sabbath,  during  which  one  was  not  allowed  to  depart 
his  home  to  seek  anything.”'5' 

Allah  said, 


iEat  of  the  good  lawful  things  We  have  provided  for  you,}  (7:160) 
this  form  of  command  is  a  simple  order  of  allowance,  guiding  to 
what  is  good.  Allah  said, 


Z?  {JSi  £& 

iAnd  they  did  not  wrong  Us  but  they  wronged  themselves}  means, 
*We  commanded  them  to  eat  from  what  We  gave  them,  and  to 
perform  the  acts  of  worship  (but  they  rebelled).’  This  Ayah  is 
similar  to  Allah’s  statement, 

' 1 '  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  6 :233  &  235 . 

*2'  At-Tabari  2:96. 

*3'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :178. 

*4'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :179. 

*5'  Ibid. 


236 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlur 

iEat  of  the  provision  of  your  Lord,  and  be  grateful  to  Him} 
(34:15). 

Yet,  the  Children  of  Israel  rebelled,  disbelieved  and 
committed  injustice  against  themselves,  even  though  they  saw 
the  clear  signs,  tremendous  miracles  and  extraordinary  events. 


The  Virtue  of  Muhammad's  Companions  over  the 
Companions  of  all  Other  Prophets 

Here  it  is  important  to  point  out  the  virtue  of  Muhammad’s 
Companions  over  the  companions  of  the  other  Prophets.  This 
includes  firmness  in  the  religion,  patience  and  the  lack  of 
arrogance,  may  Allah  be  pleased  with  them.  Although  the 
Companions  accompanied  the  Prophet  jg  in  his  travels  and 
battles,  such  as  during  the  battle  of  Tabuk,  in  intense  heat  and 
hardship,  they  did  not  ask  for  a  miracle,  though  this  was  easy 
for  the  Prophet  ;g  by  Allah’s  leave.  And  when  the  Companions 
became  hungry,  they  merely  asked  the  Prophet  -  to  invoke 
Allah  -  for  an  increase  in  the  amount  of  food.  They  collected 
whatever  food  they  had  and  brought  it  to  the  Prophet  jg,  and 
he  asked  Allah  to  bless  it,  told  each  of  them  to  take  some  food, 
and  they  filled  every  pot  they  had.  Also,  when  they  needed  rain, 
the  Prophet  jg  asked  Allah  to  send  down  rain,  and  a  rain  cloud 
came.  They  drank,  gave  water  to  their  camels  and  filled  their 
water  skins.  When  they  looked  around,  they  found  that  the 
cloud  had  only  rained  on  their  camp.  This  is  the  best  example 
of  those  who  were  willing  to  accept  Allah’s  decision  and  follow 
the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg. 


ijljSj  •Llf-  C+i*  i>i£=u  Ci  ijj^ 


458.  And  (remember)  when  We  said:  "Enter  this  town 
(Jerusalem)  and  eat  bountifully  therein  with  pleasure  and  delight 
wherever  you  wish,  and  enter  the  gate  in  prostration  (or  bowing 
with  humility)  and  say:  'Forgive  us,'  and  We  shall  forgive  you 
your  sins  and  shall  increase  (reward)  for  the  good-doers . "} 

4 59.  But  those  who  did  wrong  changed  the  word  from  tltat 
which  had  been  told  to  them  for  another,  so  We  sent  upon  the 
wrongdoers  Rijz  (a  punishment)  from  the  heaven  because  of 


237 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (50  -  74)  (Part-1) _ _ 

their  rebellion. $ 

The  Jews  were 
Rebellious  instead 
of  Appreciative 
when  They  gained 
Victory 

Allah  admonished 
the  Jews  for  avoiding 
Jihad  and  not 
entering  the  holy  land 
as  they  had  been 
ordered  to  do  when 
they  came  from  Egypt 
with  Musa,  They  were 
also  commanded  to 
fight  the  disbelieving 
‘Amallq  (Canaanites) 
dwelling  in  the  holy 
land  at  that  time.  But 
they  did  not  want  to 
fight,  because  they 
were  weak  and 
exhausted.  Allah 
punished  them  by 
causing  them  to  become  lost,  and  to  continue  wandering,  as 
Allah  has  stated  in  Surat  Al-Ma'idah  (5).  The  correct  opinion 
about  the  meaning  of,  The  holy  land’  mentioned  here  is  that  it 
was  Bayt  Al-Maqdis  (Jerusalem),  as  As-Suddi,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin 
Anas, I  1  Qatadah  and  Abu  Muslim  Al-Asfahani,  as  well  as 
others  have  stated.  Musa  said, 


itij  %  p  ^  Jf  & <  yw 


iO  people!  Enter  the  holy  land  which  Allah  has  assigned  to  you 
and  turn  not  back  (in  flight). $  (5:2 1)12' 

However,  some  scholars  said  that  the  holy  land  is  Jericho, 

^  Ibn  Abi  H&tim  1  :181 . 

,2)  Ar-Razi  3:82. 


238 _ Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

(Ariha’)  and  this  opinion  was  mentioned  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas  and 
‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Zayd. 

After  the  years  of  wandering  ended  forty  years  later,  in  the 
company  of  Yuwsha*  (Joshua)  bin  Nun,  Allah  allowed  the 
Children  of  Israel  to  conquer  the  holy  land  on  the  eve  of  a 
Friday.  On  that  day,  the  sun  was  kept  from  setting  for  a  little 
more  time,  until  victory  was  achieved.  When  the  Children  of 
Israel  conquered  the  holy  land,  they  were  commanded  to  enter 
its  gate  while, 


4, prostrating ^  in  appreciation  to  Allah  for  making  them 
victorious,  triumphant,  returning  them  to  their  land  and  saving 
them  from  being  lost  and  wandering.  Al-‘Awfi  said  that  Ibn 
‘Abbas  said  that, 

iatid  enter  the  gate  Sujjadan)  means,  “While  bowing”.1*1  Ibn  Jarir 
reported  Ibn  ‘Abbas  saying, 

iand  enter  the  gate  in  prostration ^  means,  “Through  a  small  door 
while  bowing.”  Al-Hakim  narrated  it,  and  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  added, 
“And  they  went  through  the  door  backwards!”  Al-Hasan  Al- 
Basri  said  that  they  were  ordered  to  prostrate  on  their  faces 
when  they  entered  the  city,  but  Ar-Razi  discounted  this 
explanation.  It  was  also  said  that  the  Sujud  mentioned  here 
means,  ‘submissiveness’,  for  actually  entering  while  prostrating 
is  not  possible. 

Khasif  said  that  Ikrimah  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “The 
door  mentioned  here  was  facing  the  Qiblah .”  Ibn  ‘Abbas, 
Mujahid,  As-Suddi,  Qatadah  and  Ad-Dahhak  said  that  the 
door  is  the  door  of  Hittah  in  Iylya’,  which  is  Jerusalem.  Ar-Razi 
also  reported  that  some  of  them  said  that  it  was  a  door  in  the 
direction  of  the  Qiblah”.  Khasif  said  that  ‘Ikrimah  said  that 
Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  the  Children  of  Israel  entered  the  door 
sideways.  As-Suddi  said  that  Abu  Said  Al-Azdy  said  that  Abu 
Al-Kanud  said  that  ‘Abdullah  bin  Mas*ud  said  that  they  were 

nr 


At-Tabari  2:113. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  (Part-1) 


239 


commanded  to, 

Renter  the  gate  in  prostration  (or  bowing  with  humility )}  but 
instead,  they  entered  while  their  heads  were  raised  in 
defiance.'1' 

Allah  said  next, 

sny:  'Hittah'}.  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented,  “Seek  Allah’s 
forgiveness.”121  Al-Hasan  and  Qatadah  said  that  it  means,  “Say, 
‘Relieve  us  from  our  errors.”13' 

We  s/w//  forgive  you  your  sins  and  shall  increase  (reivard)  for 
the  good-doers}  Here  is  the  reward  for  fulfilling  Allah’s 
commandment.  This  Ayah  means,  “If  you  implement  what  We 
commanded  you,  We  will  forgive  your  sins  and  multiply  your 
good  deeds.”  In  summary,  upon  achieving  victory,  the  Children 
of  Israel  were  commanded  to  submit  to  Allah  in  tongue  and 
deed  and,  to  admit  to  their  sins  and  seek  forgiveness  for  them, 
to  be  grateful  to  Allah  for  the  blessings  He  gave  them, 
hastening  to  do  the  deeds  that  Allah  loves,  as  He  said, 

Lri}  J  crU'  — .  il'j  fs\ 

iWhen  there  comes  the  help  of  Allah  (to  you,  O  Muhammad 
against  your  enemies)  and  the  conquest  (of  Makkahj.  And  you 
see  that  the  people  enter  Allah’s  religion  (Islam)  in  crowds.  So 
glorify  the  praises  of  your  Lord,  and  ask  His  forgiveness. 
Verily,  He  is  the  One  Who  accepts  the  repentance.}  (110). 

Allah  said, 

4^  Si ' S Ai  y&} 

4But  those  who  did  wrong  changed  the  word  from  that  which 
had  been  told  to  them  for  another}. 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :183. 
'2'  Ibid. 

'3'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :185. 


240 


Tafsir  I bn  Kathir 


Al-Bukhari  recorded  Abu  Hurayrah  saying  that  the  Prophet 
3fi5  said, 


j \ Ij v-jOI  J-Sfyi*)  Jj»* 

1 1 jJlij  I jJ-llj  ^  g ft ! 


«The  Children  of  Israel  were  commanded  to  enter  tlte  door  while 
bowing  and  to  say  'Hittah'.  Yet,  they  entered  the  door  on  their 
behittds,  distorting  the  words.  They  said;  'Habbah  (seed),  in 
Sha'rah  (a  /«!*>).'»' 11 

An-Nasa’i  recorded  this  part  of  it  from  Abu  Hurayrah  only, 
but  he  has  a  chain  from  the  Prophet  jg,  explaining  Allah’s 
statement, 


i'Hittahy,  saying,  “So  they  deviated  and  said  * Habbah .”|2' 
Similar  was  recorded  by  ‘Abdur-Razzaq,  and  his  route  was  also 
collected  by  Al-Bukhari.  Muslim  and  At-Tirmidhi  narrated 
similar  versions  of  this  Hadith,  At-Tirmidhi  said,  “ Hasan 
Sahih.”131 

The  summary  of  what  the  scholars  have  said  about  this 
subject  is  that  the  Children  of  Israel  distorted  Allah’s 
command  to  them  to  submit  to  Him  in  tongue  and  deed.  They 
were  commanded  to  enter  the  city  while  bowing  down,  but 
they  entered  while  sliding  on  their  rear  ends  and  raising  their 
heads!  They  were  commanded  to  say,  * Hittah ’  meaning, 
“Relieve  us  from  our  errors  and  sins.”  However,  they  mocked 
this  command  and  said,  “ Hintah  (grain  seed)  in  Sha'irah 
(barley).”  This  demonstrates  the  worst  type  of  rebellion  and 
disobedience,  and  it  is  why  Allah  released  His  anger  and 
punishment  upon  them,  all  because  of  their  sinning  and 
defying  His  commands.  Allah  said, 


4  jj «  Lm  *■  .#Ji  — k  ^  (J*  V — ^ 


4 So  We  sent  upon  the  wrongdoers  Rijz  (a  punishment)  from  the 
heaven  because  of  their  rebellion. $ 


111  Fath  Al-Bari  8:14. 

'2'  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  6 :286 . 
131  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8 :  29 1 . 


241 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  (Part-1) 


Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Every  word  in  Allah’s 
Book  that  says  Rijz  means,  ‘a  punishment.’  ”111  Mujahid,  Abu 
Malik,  As-Suddi,  Al-Hasan  and  Qatadah  were  reported  to  have 
said  that  Rijz  means  Torment.’121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  narrated  that 
Sa‘d  bin  Malik,  Usamah  bin  Zayd  and  Khuzaymah  bin  Thabit 
said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


jlS  ii  •  j*r j  jjplUl* 


«The  plague  is  a  Rijz,  a  punishment  with  which  Allah 
punished  those  before  yow.®131 

This  is  also  how  An-Nasa’i  recorded  this  Hadith J41  In 
addition,  the  basis  of  this  Hadith  was  collected  in  the  Two 
Sahihs, 

»U jjJ-X  lip 

*  If  you  hear  of  the  plague  in  a  land,  then  do  not  enter  if.®151 

Ibn  Jarir  recorded  Usamah  bin  Zayd  saying  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 

« This  calamity  and  sickness  (i.e.  the  plague)  is  a  Rijz,  a 
punishment  ivith  which  some  nations  who  were  before  you  were 
punished  .»|61 

The  basis  of  this  Hadith  was  also  collected  in  the  Two 
Sahihsj 71 


*1  \jts-  Gist  uiii  1/ ■* 

Jfji'  ■ _ \  'ij  «»'  6jj  ot  IA^=*  «j;U  A-*  ■“ 


i 


460.  And  ( remember )  when  Musa  asked  for  water  for  his 
people,  We  said:  " Strike  the  stone  with  your  stick."  Then 


111  AtTabari  2:118. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 : 1 87 . 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :  186. 

141  An-Nasa’i  in  Al-Kubra  4 :362 . 

151  Fath  Al-Bari  10 : 189 ,  and  Muslim  4 : 1739 . 
161  At-Tabari  2:116. 

171  FafhAI-Bdri  6:512,  Muslim  4  :1737. 


gushed  forth  therefrom  twelve  springs.  Each  (group  of)  people 
knew  its  own  place  for  water.  "Eat  and  drink  of  that  which 
Allah  has  provided  and  do  not  act  corruptly,  making  mischief 
on  the  earth 


Twelve  Springs  gush  forth 

Allah  said,  “Remember  My  favor  on  you  when  I  answered  the 
supplication  of  your  Prophet,  MQsa,  when  he  asked  Me  to 
provide  you  with  water.  I  made  the  water  available  for  you, 
making  it  gush  out  through  a  stone.  Twelve  springs  burst  out 
of  that  stone,  a  designated  spring  for  each  of  your  tribes.  You 
eat  from  the  manna  and  the  quails  and  drink  from  the  water 
that  I  provided  for  you,  without  any  effort  or  hardship  for  you. 
So  worship  the  One  Who  did  this  for  you. 

4.k+-rr“  oiVl  . _ !  ' 

iAnd  do  not  act  corruptly,  making  mischief  on  the  earth }  meaning, 
Do  not  return  the  favor  by  committing  acts  of  disobedience 
that  cause  favors  to  disappear.” 

Ibn  Abbas  said  that  the  Children  of  Israel,  “Had  a  square 
stone  that  Musa  was  commanded  to  strike  with  his  staff  and, 
as  a  result,  twelve  springs  burst  out  of  that  stone,  three  on 
each  side.  Each  tribe  was,  therefore,  designated  a  certain 
spring,  and  they  used  to  drink  from  their  springs.  They  never 
had  to  travel  from  their  area,  they  would  find  the  same  bounty 
in  the  same  manner  they  had  in  the  first  area.”111  This 
narration  is  part  of  the  long  Hadith  that  An-Nasa’i,  Ibn  Jarir 
and  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  recorded  about  the  trials. 

This  story  is  similar  to  the  story  in  Surat  Al-'Ardf  (Chapter 
7)  although  the  latter  was  revealed  in  Makkah.  In  Surat  Al- 
A'raf,  Allah  used  the  third  person  when  He  mentioned  the 
Children  of  Israel  to  the  Prophet  jg  and  narrated  what  He 
favored  them  with.  In  this  Surat  Al-Baqarah,  which  was 
revealed  in  Al-Madlnah,  Allah  directed  His  Speech  at  the 
Children  of  Israel.  Further,  Allah  said  in  Surat  Al-A'rdf, 


111  At-Tabari  2:120. 


243 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  (Part-1) 


4 And  there  gushed  forth  out  of  it  twelve  springs}  (7:160), 
describing  what  first  occurred  when  the  water  begins  to  gush 
out.  In  the  Ayah  in  Surat  Al-Baqarah,  Allah  described  what 
happened  later  on,  meaning  when  the  water  burst  out  in  full 
force.  Allah  knows  best. 


b  Jifr  1?  12*  u  &im  luj  u  &  ^  iut 

%  jm  — fit  J*  vii'  j\i  l 


461.  And  ( remember )  when  you  said,  "O  Musa  !  We  cannot 
endure  one  kind  of  food.  So  invoke  your  Lord  for  us  to  bring 
forth  for  us  of  ivhat  the  earth  grows,  its  herbs,  its  cucumber  its 
Finn,  its  lentils  and  its  onions."  He  said,  "Would  you 
exchange  that  which  is  better  for  that  which  is  loiver?  Go  you 
down  to  any  town  and  you  shall  find  what  you  want!"} 


The  Children  of  Israel  preferred  Foods  inferior  to  Manna 
and  Quails 


Allah  said,  “And  remember  My  favor  on  you  when  I  sent 
down  the  manna  and  quails  to  you,  a  good,  pure,  beneficial, 
easily  acquired  food.  And  remember  your  ungratefulness  for 
what  We  granted  you.  Remember  how  you  asked  Musa  to 
exchange  this  type  of  food  for  an  inferior  type  that  consists  of 
vegetation,  and  so  forth.”  Al-Hasan  Al-Basri  said  about  the 
Children  of  Israel,  “They  were  bored  and  impatient  with  the 
type  of  food  they  were  provided.  They  also  remembered  the  life 
they  used  to  live,  when  their  diet  consisted  of  lentils,  onions, 
garlic  and  herbs.”  They  said, 


40  Musa  !  We  cannot  endure  one  kind  of  food.  So  invoke  your 
Lord  for  us  to  bring  forth  for  us  of  what  the  earth  grows,  its  herbs, 
its  cucumbers,  its  Film,  its  lentils  and  its  onions}.  They  said, 


& 

40ne  kind  of  food}  meaning,  the  manna  and  quails,  because 
they  ate  the  same  food  day  after  day.  The  Ayah  mentioned 


244 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 

lentils,  onions  and  herbs,  which  are  all  known  types  of  foods. 
As  for  the  Fum,  Ibn  Mas'ud  read  it,  Thum  (garlic).  Also,  Ibn  Abi 
Hatim  narrated  that  Al-Hasan  said  about  the  Ayah, 


4It$  Fum},  “Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  Fum  means,  garlic.”*1' 

He  also  said  that  the  expression,  ‘Fumu-lanna’  means,  “bake 
for  us’,  according  to  the  languages  of  old.  Ibn  Jarir 
commented,  “If  this  is  true,  then  ‘Fum’  is  one  of  the  words 
whose  pronounciation  were  altered,  the  letter  ‘fa’  was  replaced 
by  the  letter  ‘tha’,  since  they  are  similar  in  sound."*2'  And 
Allah  knows  best.  Others  said  that  Fum  is  wheat,  the  kind 
used  for  bread.  Al-Bukhari  said,  “Some  of  them  said  that  Fum 
includes  all  grains  or  seeds  that  are  eaten.” 

Allah’s  statement, 

4  - - ^  _>*  Jji' 

4He  said,  "Would  you  exchange  that  which  is  better  for  that  which  is 
lower?  }  criticized  the  Jews  for  asking  for  inferior  foods, 
although  they  were  living  an  easy  life,  eating  tasty,  beneficial 
and  pure  food.  Allah’s  statement, 


4Go  you  down  to  any  Misr}  means,  ‘any  city’,  as  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
said.'3'  Ibn  Jarir  also  reported  that  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  and  Ar-Rabl‘ 
bin  Anas  said  that  the  Ayah  refers  to  Misr,  the  Egypt  of 
Fir'awn.'4'  The  truth  is  that  the  Ayah  means  any  city,  as  Ibn 
‘Abbas  and  other  scholars  stated.  Therefore,  the  meaning  of 
Musa’s  statement  to  the  Children  of  Israel  becomes,  “What  you 
are  asking  for  is  easy,  for  it  is  available  in  abundance  in  any 
city  that  you  might  enter.  So  since  what  you  asked  for  is 
available  in  all  of  the  villages  and  cities,  I  will  not  ask  Allah  to 
provide  us  with  it,  especially  when  it  is  an  inferior  type  of  food.” 
This  is  why  Musa  said  to  them, 


tty 


* 1 '  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 : 1 93 . 
,2'  At-Tabari  2:130. 

'3'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :194 
■4|  At-Jabari  2:134. 


245 


Surah  2.  AI-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  £ Part-2) 

iWould  you  exchange  tlwt  which  is  better  for  that  which  is 
lower?  Go  you  down  to  any  town  and  you  shall  find  what  you 
want! 


Since  their  request  was  the  result  of  boredom  and  arrogance 
and  since  fulfilling  it  was  unnecessary,  their  request  was 
denied.  Allah  knows  best. 


ji'  C £  S&j  1>  X  }‘j*  'H>'J  ^ 

'vV£=»>  Lc  tilt'*  A*«i'  jsii 


461 .  And  they  were  covered  with  humiliation  and  misery,  and 
they  drew  on  themselves  the  wrath  of  Allah.  That  was  because 
they  used  to  disbelieve  in  the  Ay  at  (proofs,  evidence)  of  Allah 
and  killed  the  Prophets  wrongfully.  That  was  because  they 
disobeyed  and  used  to  transgress  the  bounds  (in  their 
disobedience  to  Allah,  i.e.  commit  crimes  and  sins.)}  (2:61) 


Covering  the  Jews  in  Humiliation  and  Misery 

Allah  said, 

4*^='— j i) 

iAnd  they  ivere  covered  with  humiliation  and  misery }.  This  Ayah 
indicates  that  the  Children  of  Israel  were  plagued  with 
humiliation,  and  that  this  will  continue,  meaning  that  it  will 
never  cease.  They  will  continue  to  suffer  humiliation  at  the 
hands  of  all  who  interact  with  them,  along  with  the  disgrace 
that  they  feel  inwardly.  Al-Hasan  commented,  “Allah  humiliated 
them,  and  they  shall  have  no  protector.  Allah  put  them  under 
the  feet  of  the  Muslims,  who  appeared  at  a  time  when  the 
MajOs  (Zoroastrians)  were  taking  the  Jizyah  (tax)  from  the 
Jews.”1 11  Also,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Ar-Rabi‘  bin  Anas  and  As-Suddi 
said  that  ‘misery’  used  in  the  Ayah  means,  ‘poverty. ’,21  ‘Atiyah 
Al-‘Awfi  said  that  ‘misery’  means,  ‘paying  the  tilth  (tax).1*3’  In 
addition,  Ad-Dahhak  commented  on  Allah’s  statement, 

111  IbnAbi  Hatim  1:195,  196. 

121  IbnAbi  Hatim  1:196. 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :196. 


246 


Tafsir  [bn  Kathir 


& 


<ji  s— J 


iattd  they  drew  on  themselves  the  wrath  of  Allah},  “They  deserved 
Allah’s  anger. ”*11  Also,  Ibn  Jarir  said  that, 

/.t*» 


iand  they  drew  on  themselves  the  wrath  of  Allah ^  means,  “They 
went  back  with  the  wrath.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 

Jk  &  J  ij 


iVerily,  1  intend  to  let  you  draw  my  sin  on  yourself  as  well  as 
yours}  ( Al-Ma'idah  5:29)  meaning,  You  will  end  up  carrying  my, 
and  your,  mistakes  instead  of  me’.  Thus,  the  meaning  of  the 
Ayah  becomes,  They  went  back  carrying  Allah’s  anger;  Allah’s 
wrath  descended  on  them;  they  deserved  Allah’s  anger.’  ”'2' 
Allah’s  statement, 


iThat  was  because  they  used  to  disbelieve  in  the  Aydt  (proofs, 
evidences,  etc.)  of  Allah  and  killed  the  Prophets  wrongfully .}  means, 
“This  is  what  We  rewarded  the  Children  of  Israel  with: 
humiliation  and  misery.”  Allah’s  anger  that  descended  on  the 
Children  of  Israel  was  a  part  of  the  humiliation  they  earned, 
because  of  their  defiance  of  the  truth,  disbelief  in  Allah’s  Aydt 
and  belittling  the  carriers  of  Allah’s  Law  i.e.  the  Prophets  and 
their  following.  The  Children  of  Israel  rejected  the  Messengers 
and  even  killed  them.  Surely,  there  is  no  form  of  disbelief  worse 
than  disbelieving  in  Allah’s  Aydt  and  murdering  the  Prophets  of 
Allah. 


Meaning  of  Kibr 

Similarly,  in  a  Hadlth  recorded  in  the  Two  Sahihs  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  -jgj  said, 

kij  jaj‘i  % 

t'Kibr,  is  refusing  the  truth  and  degrading  (belittling)  people  V3* 

111  At-Tabari  2:138 
12>  Ibid. 

Muslim  1 :93. 


247 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  (Part-1) 


Imam  Ahmad  recorded,  ‘Abdullah  bin  Mas'ud  saying  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  sg  said, 


f  yji 


iThe  people  who  will  receive  the  most  torment  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection  are:  a  man  who  was  killed  by  a  Prophet  or  who  killed  a 
Prophet,  an  unjust  ruler  and  one  who  mutilates  (the  dead).*[l] 
Allah’s  statement, 

i_yl£=y  \yZt-  Ct 


iThat  was  because  they  disobeyed  and  used  to  transgress  the  bounds } 
mentions  another  reason  why  the  Children  of  Israel  were 
punished  in  this  manner,  for  they  used  to  disobey  and 
transgress  the  limits.  Disobedience  is  to  do  what  is  prohibited, 
while  transgression  entails  overstepping  the  set  limits  of  what  is 
allowed  and  what  is  prohibited.  Allah  knows  best. 


1y\',  £  6',^ 


462.  Verily,  those  who  believe  and  those  who  are  Jews  and 
Christians,  and  Sabians  (Sabi 'in),  whoever  believes  in  Allah 
and  the  Last  Day  and  does  righteous  good  deeds  shall  have  their 
reward  with  their  Lord,  on  them  shall  be  no  fear,  nor  shall  they 
grieve.} 


Faith  and  doing  Righteous  Deeds  equals  Salvation  in  all 
Times 

After  Allah  described  the  condition  -  and  punishment  -  of 
those  who  defy  His  commands,  fall  into  His  prohibitions  and 
transgress  set  limits  by  committing  prohibited  acts,  He  stated 
that  the  earlier  nations  who  were  righteous  and  obedient 
received  the  rewards  for  their  good  deeds.  This  shall  be  the 
case,  until  the  Day  of  Judgment.  Therefore,  whoever  follows 
the  unlettered  Messenger  and  Prophet  shall  acquire  eternal 
happiness  and  shall  neither  fear  from  what  will  happen  in  the 
future  nor  become  sad  for  what  has  been  lost  in  the  past. 


hi  Ahmad  1 :407 . 


248 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathir 
Similarly,  Allah  said, 

v  if  fqjl 

■£ 

4 No  doubt!  Verily,  the 
Awliyd'  of  Allah1  1  ,  no 
fear  shall  come  upon 
them  nor  slmll  they 
grieve >  (10:62). 

The  angels  will 
proclaim  to  the  dying 
believers,  as 
mentioned, 

^  j3i  £il 

iVerily,  those  who  say: 
"Our  Lord  is  Allah 
(alone),"  and  then  they 
stand  firm,  on  them  the 
angels  will  descend  (at  the  time  of  their  death)  (saying) :  " Fear  not, 
nor  grieve!  But  receive  the  glad  tidings  of  Paradise  which  you  have 
been  promised !"$.  ( 41:30) 


J 


mm  mm  Vi 

->1  J  5 ■  -*■&.-> 

y*3 '  <4  jilj  fv*) 

lip  p-fr' 

3Lsijj  $  iuid 


The  Meaning  of  Mu’min,  or  Believer 

‘Ali  bin  Abi  Talhah  narrated  from  Ibn  'Abbas,  about, 

&Ms  bili  'P-  iS  k> 


iVerily,  those  who  believe  and  those  who  are  Jews  and 
Christians ,  and  Sabians ,  whoever  believes  in  Allah  and  the  Last 
Day)™ 


^  The  obedient  believers . 
Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :198. 


249 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  (Part-1 ) 


that  Allah  revealed  the  following  Ayah  afterwards, 
j;  j  j*j  iL  o'*  tl*  (*4-^ 


whoever  seeks  religion  other  than  Islam,  it  will  never  be 
accepted  of  him,  and  in  the  Hereafter  he  will  be  one  of  the 
losers ^  (3:85). 


This  statement  by  Ibn  ‘Abbas  indicates  that  Allah  does  not 
accept  any  deed  or  work  from  anyone,  unless  it  conforms  to 
the  Law  of  Muhammad  sg  that  is,  after  Allah  sent  Muhammad 
Before  that,  every  person  who  followed  the  guidance  of  his 
own  Prophet  was  on  the  correct  path,  following  the  correct 
guidance  and  was  saved. 


Why  the  Jews  were  called  ‘Yahud’ 

The  Jews  are  the  followers  of  Prophet  Musa,  who  used  to 
refer  to  the  Tawrah  for  judgment.  Yahud  is  a  word  that 
means,  ‘repenting’,  just  as  Musa  said, 

iCertainly  we  have  Hudna  to  Yoi>  meaning,  we  repent  to  You. 
This  indicates  that  they  were  first  called  Yahud,  because  they 
repented  and,  because  they  were  kind  to  each  other.  It  was  also 
said  that  they  were  called  Yahud  in  reference  to  Yahuda 
(Judah)  the  eldest  son  of  Prophet  Ya'qub.  Abu  ‘Amr  bin  Al-‘Ala’ 
said  that  they  were  called  Yahud,  because  they  swayed  when 
they  read  the  Tawrah. 


Why  the  Christians  were  called  ‘Nasara’ 

When  “Isa  was  sent,  the  Children  of  Israel  were  required  to 
follow  and  obey  him.  The  followers  of  Isa  and  his  companions 
are  called  An-Nasara,  because  they  gave  aid  and  support  to 
each  other.  They  are  also  called  Ansar  (helpers),  as  ‘Isa  said, 

ifs  ’fit  ji  S&  %\  zsjcfj 

i'yVho  will  be  my  helpers  in  Allah's  cause?"  Al-Haivdriyyun 
said :  "We  are  the  helpers  of  Allah  .'>(61:14) 

It  was  said  that  they  were  called  ‘Nasara’,  because  they 
inhabited  a  land  called  An-Nasirah  (Nazareth),  as  Qatadah,  Ibn 


250 


Tgjsfr  Ibn  Kathir 


Jurayj  and  Ibn  ‘Abbas  were  reported  to  have  said,111  Allah 
knows  best.  Nasara  is  certainly  plural  for  Nasr&n. 

When  Allah  sent  Muhammad  as  the  Last  and  Final  Prophet 
and  Messenger  to  all  of  the  Children  of  Adam,  mankind  was 
required  to  believe  in  him,  obey  him  and  refrain  from  what  he 
prohibited  them;  those  who  do  this  are  true  believers.  The 
Ummah  of  Muhammad  was  called  ‘Mu ’minin’  (believers), 
because  of  the  depth  of  their  faith  and  certainty,  and  because 
they  believe  in  all  of  the  previous  Prophets  and  matters  of  the 
Unseen. 


The  Sabi'un  or  Sabians 

• 

There  is  a  difference  of  opinion  over  the  identity  of  the 
Sabians.  Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  said  that  Layth  bin  Abu  Sulaym 
said  that  Mujahid  said  that,  “The  Sabians  are  between  the 
Majus,  the  Jews  and  the  Christians.  They  do  not  have  a 
specific  religion. ”’2'  Similar  is  reported  from  Ibn  Abi  Najlh.'3' 
Similar  statements  were  attributed  to  ‘Ata’  and  Said  bin 
Jubayr.14'  They  (others)  say  that  the  Sabians  are  a  sect  among 
the  People  of  the  Book  who  used  to  read  the  Zabur  (Psalms), 
others  say  that  they  are  a  people  who  worshipped  the  angels 
or  the  stars.  It  appears  that  the  closest  opinion  to  the  truth, 
and  Allah  knows  best,  is  Mujahid’s  statement  and  those  who 
agree  with  him  like  Wahb  bin  Munabbih,  that  the  Sabians  are 
neither  Jews  nor  Christians  nor  MajQs  nor  polytheists.  Rather, 
they  did  not  have  a  specific  religion  that  they  followed  and 
enforced,  because  they  remained  living  according  to  their 
Fitrah  (instinctual  nature).  This  is  why  the  idolators  used, to 
call  whoever  embraced  Islam  a  ‘Sabi’,  meaning,  that  he 
abandoned  all  religions  that  existed  on  the  earth.  Some 
scholars  stated  that  the  Sabians  are  those  who  never  received 
a  message  by  any  Prophet.  And  Allah  knows  best. 


#-»  L  1^2^*  t* 

ji  JJZS  *LLLjj  sir*  f  J0£>jSi5 


111  Ar-Rfizi  3:97. 

I2*  At-Tabari  2 : 146 . 

I3*  Ibid. 

141  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  -.199-200. 


Surah  2.  Al-Banarah  (50  -  74)  (Parti} 


251 


463.  And  (O  Qiildren  of  lsrd'il,  remember)  when  We  took  your 
covenant  and  We  raised  above  you  the  Mount  (saying) ;  "Hold 
fast  to  that  which  We  have  given  you,  and  remember  that  which 
is  therein  so  that  you  may  acquire  Taqwa .  £ 

464.  Then  after  that  you  turned  away.  Had  it  not  been  for  the 
grace  and  mercy  of  Allah  upon  you,  indeed  you  ivould  have 
been  among  the  losers. $ 


Taking  the  Covenant  from  the  Jews 


Allah  reminded  the  Children  of  Israel  of  the  pledges, 
covenants  and  promises  that  He  took  from  them  to  believe  in 
Him  alone,  without  a  partner,  and  follow  His  Messengers. 
Allah  stated  that  when  He  took  their  pledge  from  them,  He 
raised  the  mountain  above  their  heads,  so  that  they  affirm  the 
pledge  that  they  gave  Allah  and  abide  by  it  with  sincerity  and 
seriousness.  Hence,  Allah’s  statement, 


“£  %  1>&>  yi  jit  t 


:>0 


iAnd  (remember)  when  We  raised  the  mountain  over  them  as  if 
it  had  been  a  canopy,  and  they  thought  that  it  was  going  to  fall 
on  them .  (We  said) :  "Hold  firmly  to  wltat  We  have  given  you 
(Tawrah),  and  retnember  that  which  is  therein  (act  on  its 
commandments),  so  that  you  may  fear  Allah  and  obey  Him."* 
(7:171). 

The  mount  mentioned  here  is  At-TQr,  just  as  it  was  explained 
in  Surat  Al-A'raf  according  to  the  Tafsir  of  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Mujahid, 
‘Ata’,  Ikrimah,  Al-Hasan,  Ad-Dahhak,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  and 
others.1 11  This  is  more  obvious.  There  is  another  report  from 
Ibn  ‘Abbas  saying;  The  Tur  is  a  type  of  mountain  that 
vegetation  grows  on,  if  no  vegetation  grows  on  it,  it  is  not  called 
Tur.*121  And  in  the  Hadlth  about  the  trials,  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said; 
“When  they  (the  Jews)  refused  to  obey,  Allah  raised  the 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :203 
121  Ibid. 


252  _ Tafsir  Ibn  Kqthir 

mountain  above  their  heads  so  that  they  would  listen.”*1' 
Al-Hasan  said  that  Allah’s  statement, 

1 1^3'*  b 

iHold  fast  to  that  which  We  have  given  you }  means,  the 
Tawrah.*2*  Mujahid  said  that  the  Ayah  commanded,  “Strictly 
adhere  to  it.”*3'  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  and  Ar-Rabl‘  said  that, 


iand  remember  that  which  is  therein}  means,  “Read  the  Tawrah 
and  implement  it.”*4*  Allah’s  statement, 


^ 


iThen  after  that  you  turned  away.  Had  it  not  been  far  the  grace  of 
Allah }  means,  “Yet,  after  the  firm  pledge  that  you  gave,  you  still 
deviated  and  broke  your  pledge”; 

M  &  *&} 

iHad  it  not  been  far  the  grace  and  tnercy  of  Allah  upon  you}, 
meaning,  by  forgiving  you  and  by  sending  the  Prophets  and 
Messengers  to  you, 

«  Mz} 


ilndeed  you  would  have  been  among  the  losers}  meaning,  in  this 
life  and  the  Hereafter  due  to  their  breach  of  the  covenant. 


$  biii  yUlf  4  £&>  c/J'  ££  && 

Wik"  bj  U-Jj  Cti  b-i 


465.  And  indeed  you  knew  those  amongst  you  who 
transgressed  in  the  matter  of  the  Sabbath  (i.e.  Saturday).  We 
said  to  them  :  "Be  you  monkeys,  despised  and  rejected.”} 

466.  So  We  made  this  punishment  an  example  far  those  in  front 
of  it  and  those  behind  it,  and  a  lesson  far  Al-Muttaqm  (the 
pious.} 


***  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubrd  6 :396 . 
*2*  Ibn  Abi  IJatim  1 :204 
*3*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :205. 

*4*  Ibid. 


253 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  (Parti} _ 

The  Jews  breach  the  Sanctity  of  the  Sabbath 

Allah  said, 


iAnd  indeed  you  knew}.  This  Ayah  means,  O  Jews!  Remember 
that  Allah  sent  His  torment  on  the  village  that  disobeyed  Him 
and  broke  their  pledge  and  their  covenant  to  observe  the 
sanctity  of  the  Sabbath.  They  began  using  deceitful  means  to 
avoid  honoring  the  Sabbath  by  placing  nets,  ropes  and  artificial 
pools  of  water  for  the  purpose  of  fishing  before  the  Sabbath. 
When  the  fish  came  in  abundance  on  Saturday  as  usual,  they 
were  caught  in  the  ropes  and  nets  for  the  rest  of  Saturday. 
During  the  night,  the  Jews  collected  the  fish  after  the  Sabbath 
ended.  When  they  did  that,  Allah  changed  them  from  humans 
into  monkeys,  the  animals  having  the  form  closest  to  humans. 
Their  evil  deeds  and  deceit  appeared  lawful  on  the  surface,  but 
they  were  in  reality  wicked.  This  is  why  their  punishment  was 
compatible  with  their  crime.  This  story  is  explained  in  detail  in 
Surat  Al-A'raf  where  Allah  said  (7:163), 


■»l  ^  4  •./*£■  ^ 


w 


OjjL-JU  y 


iAnd  ask  them  (O  Muhammad  &)  about  the  town  that  was  by 
the  sea;  when  they  transgressed  in  the  matter  of  the  Sabbath 
(i  .e .  Saturday) :  when  their  fish  came  to  them  openly  on  the 
Sabbath  day,  and  did  not  come  to  them  on  the  day  they  had  no 
Sabbath.  Thus  We  made  a  trial  of  them,  for  they  used  to  rebel 
(disobey  Allah).} (7: 1 63) 

In  his  Tafsir,  Al-‘Awfi  reported  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas  that  he  said, 

$  til} 


iWe  said  to  them :  "Be  you  monkeys,  despised  and  rejected"}  means, 
“Allah  changed  their  bodies  into  those  of  monkeys  and  swines. 
The  young  people  turned  into  monkeys  while  the  old  people 
turned  into  swine.”*1*  Shayban  An-Nahwi  reported  that 


m 


lbn  Abi  H&tim  1 :210. 


254 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Qatadah  commented  on, 

$  m 


4  We  said  to  them :  "Be  you  monkeys,  despised  and  rejected"}, 

“These  people  were  turned  into  howling  monkeys  with  tails, 
after  being  men  and  women.”*1* 


The  Monkeys  and  Swine  that  exist  now  are  not  the 
Descendants  of  Those  that  were  transformed 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  recorded  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Those  who 
violated  the  sanctity  of  the  Sabbath  were  turned  into  monkeys, 
then  they  perished  without  offspring.”*2*  Ad-Dahhak  said  that 
Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Allah  turned  them  into  monkeys  because  of 
their  sins.  They  only  lived  on  the  earth  for  three  days,  for  no 
transformed  person  ever  lives  more  than  three  days.  They  did 
not  eat,  drink  or  have  offspring.  Allah  transformed  their 
shapes  into  monkeys,  and  He  does  what  He  wills,  with  whom 
He  wills  and  He  changes  the  shape  of  whomever  He  wills.  On 
the  other  hand,  Allah  created  the  monkeys,  swines  and  the 
rest  of  the  creation  in  the  six  days  (of  creation)  that  He 
mentioned  in  His  Book.”*3* 

Allah’s  statement, 

<So  We  made  this  punishment  an  example }  means,  Allah  made  the 
people  of  this  village,  who  violated  the  sanctity  of  the  Sabbath, 


}an  example}  via  the  way  they  were  punished.  Similarly,  Allah 
said  about  Pharaoh, 

4 So  Allah,  seized  him  with  punishing  example  for  his  last  and  first 
transgression}  (79:25). 

Allah’s  statement, 

***  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :209 
*2*  Ibid. 

*3*  At-Jabari  2:167. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  (Parti) 


255 


'iiA  ct* 


^)r  those  in  front  of  it  and  those  behind  it}  meaning,  for  the  other 
villages.  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented,  “Meaning,  *We  made  this 
village  an  example  for  the  villages  around  it  by  the  manner  in 
which  We  punished  its  people.”’  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


A’y-  C  liuif  &j} 


iAttd  indeed  We  have  destroyed  towns  (populations)  round 
about  you,  and  We  have  (repeatedly)  shown  (them)  the  Aydt 
(proofs,  evidences,  verses,  lessons,  signs,  revelations,  etc.)  in 
various  ways  that  they  might  return  (to  the  truth  and  believe  in 
the  Oneness  of  Allah  -  Islamic  Monotheism)}.  (46:27) 

Therefore,  Allah  made  them  an  example  for  those  who  lived 
during  their  time  as  well  as  a  reminder  for  those  to  come,  by 
preserving  their  story.  This  is  why  Allah  said, 

io&ll  &£yj} 


iand  a  lesson  far  Al-Muttaqin  (the  pious)},  meaning,  a  reminder. 
This  Ayah  means,  “The  torment  and  punishment  that  this 
village  suffered  was  a  result  of  indulging  in  Allah’s  prohibitions 
and  their  deceit.  Hence,  those  who  have  Taqwa  should  be 
aware  of  their  evil  behavior,  so  that  what  occurred  to  this 
village  does  not  befall  them  as  well.”  Also,  Imam  Abu  ‘Abdullah 
bin  Battah  reported  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 

“cM  AA't  U  it 

“Do  not  commit  what  the  ]ews  committed,  breaching  wlmt 
Allah  has  forbidden,  by  resorting  to  the  lowest  types  of 
deceit. 


This  Hadith  has  a  good  [Jayid)  chain  of  narration.  Allah 
knowsjjest. 

"""if.  ip  Js  $3  \H  ;>  oi  pA  'if  l\  &  3U  s $} 

«  $P  Si 

467.  And  (remember)  when  Musa  said  to  his  people:  "Verily, 


m 


Inva*  Al’Ghalil  5 :375 . 


256 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

Allah  commands  you  that  you  slaughter  a  cow."  Tltey  said, 
"Do  you  make  fun  of  us?"  He  said,  "I  take  Allah's  refuge  from 
being  among  Al-Jdhilin  (the  ignorant  or  the  foolish). 


The  Story  of  the  murdered  Israeli  Man  and  the  Cow 


Allah  said,  ‘O  Children  of  Israel!  Remember  how  I  blessed 
you  with  miracle  of  the  cow  that  was  the  means  for 
discovering  the  identity  of  the  murderer,  when  the  murdered 
man  was  brought  back  to  life,’ 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  recorded  ‘Ubaydah  As-Salmani  saying,  “There 
was  a  man  from  among  the  Children  of  Israel  who  was  impotent. 
He  had  substantial  wealth,  and  only  a  nephew  who  would 
inherit  from  him.  So  his  nephew  killed  him  and  moved  his  body 
at  night,  placing  it  at  the  doorstep  of  a  certain  man.  The  next 
morning,  the  nephew  cried  out  for  revenge,  and  the  people  took 
up  their  weapons  and  almost  fought  each  other.  The  wise  men 
among  them  said,  *Why  would  you  kill  each  other,  while  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  is  still  among  you?’  So  they  went  to  Musa 
and  mentioned  the  matter  to  him  and  Musa  said, 


jp  ji  p. 


j  a  r#  00 1#  t i  \£z  0i  pA  # 


4" Verily,  Allah  commands  you  that  you  slaughter  a  cow." 
They  said,  "Do  you  make  fun  of  us?"  He  said,  "1  take  Allah's 
refuge  from  being  among  Al-Jdhilin  ( the  ignorant  or  the 
foolish )$.” 

“Had  they  not  disputed,  it  would  have  been  sufficient  for  them 
to  slaughter  any  cow.  However,  they  disputed,  and  the  matter 
was  made  more  difficult  for  them,  until  they  ended  up  looking 
for  the  specific  cow  that  they  were  later  ordered  to  slaughter. 
They  found  the  designated  cow  with  a  man,  only  who  owned 
that  cow.  He  said,  ‘By  Allah!  I  will  only  sell  it  for  its  skin’s  fill 
of  gold.’  So  they  paid  the  cow’s  fill  of  its  skin  in  gold, 
slaughtered  it  and  touched  the  dead  man  with  a  part  of  it.  He 
stood  up,  and  they  asked  him,  Who  killed  you?’  He  said,  Tnat 
main,’  and  pointed  to  his  nephew.  He  died  again,  and  his  nephew 
was  not  allowed  to  inherit  him.  Thereafter,  whoever  committed 
murder  for  the  purpose  of  gaining  inheritance  was  not  allowed  to 
inherit.”*1*  Ibn  Jarir  reported  something  similar  to  that.  Allah 
m 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :1 14. 


v  iZMZ  U  ^ga  knows  best.111 

C  (J  :£J  iCj  U  ijS\i> 

•*  *x  ?>  J>:  ft  #  k 

\)\±*^’itet,$jZ%j;}i\j$  £«  »>  $  *  Jv* 

£#££$  c  \&%  & 
c  ^f-  <Ha ^ 

*  ^  ™  *J  ’ -  >  >r  i^>.f  *..r  ,r^ .•  ^  ~ 

ip^iyi^sy  ^  w  ek  •'•—  ••'■*• 

«Xif  u-j~nii£Zi*.  <  •* s  t?  #  *&»* 

r.^>|Vff>*  >v/irii;Y'|K:  ? » ^vVSjr*  •  <?"~‘1  ^  ^  '^rL 

w  au‘  ♦L**  o^  Ljj  j  u-lu- 

^  jv  ^  $  )£■>&£ 

^4-^  o?.P o£^j f£i 'jU>!<^ 5>iiJii»1$0  ^  ^  ]j-  ^  ?jq 

^  i  ''i/  »/f  >?  *.  ,  '*  ,  \  *  \  '  \  C*  C  >-'•''  c  '  U  ' 

»>Lic.U4_jot>j.Ajj3 ^>i>_.^ut(*a^=»j^-i  r4.;  y  ^  fjjfcf 

i^KTj^yiyS^  u^ii  ^Jt  a.  a®  ijcs 

^6S.  77iei/  said, 

-  ==^  “Ca//  upon  your 

Lord  for  us  tluit  He  may  make  plain  to  us  what  it  is!"  He  said, 
"He  says,  'Verily,  it  is  a  cow  neither  too  old  nor  too  young, 
but  (it  is)  between  the  two  conditions',  so  do  what  you  are 
commanded ."} 

469.  They  said,  " Call  upon  your  Lord  for  us  to  make  plain  to 
us  its  colour."  He  said,  "He  says,  'It  is  a  yelloiv  cow,  bright  in 
its  colour,  pleasing  the  beholders.'  "} 

470.  They  said,  "Call  upon  your  Lord  for  us  to  make  plain  to 
us  what  it  is.  Verily,  to  us  all  cows  are  alike.  And  surely,  if 
Allah  wills,  we  will  be  guided."} 

471 .  He  (Musa)  said,  "He  says,  'It  is  a  cow  neither  trained  to 


At-Tabari  2  : 1 83 . 


258 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

till  the  soil  nor  water  the  fields,  sound,  having  no  bletnish  in 
it.’  "  They  said,  "Now  you  have  brought  the  truth."  So  they 
slaughtered  it  though  they  loere  near  to  not  doing  it.} 


The  Stubbornness  of  the  Jews  regarding  the  Cow;  Allah 
made  the  Matter  difficult  for  Them 


Allah  mentioned  the  stubbornness  of  the  Children  of  Israel 
and  the  many  unnecessary  questions  they  asked  their 
Messengers.  This  is  why  when  they  were  stubborn,  Allah  made 
the  decisions  difficult  for  them.  Had  they  slaughtered  a  cow, 
any  cow,  it  would  have  been  sufficient  for  them,  as  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
and  ‘Ubaydah  have  said.  Instead,  they  made  the  matter 
difficult,  and  this  is  why  Allah  made  it  even  more  difficult  for 
them.  They  said, 

& j  G  $} 


iCall  upon  your  Lord  for  us  that  He  may  make  plain  to  us  what  it 
is!},  meaning,  “What  is  this  cow  and  what  is  its  description?” 
Musa  said, 


$He  says,  'Verily,  it  is  a  coiv  neither  too  old  nor  too  young'}, 
meaning,  that  it  is  neither  old  nor  below  the  age  of  breeding. 
This  is  the  opinion  of  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  As-Suddi,  Mujahid, 
‘Ikrimah,  ‘Atiyah  Al-‘Awfi,  ‘Ata’,  Al-Khurasani,  Wahb  bin 
Munabbih,  Ad-Dahhak,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah  and  Ibn  ‘Abbas.111 
Ad-Dahhak  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that, 

& 1  dJf. 


}But  (it  is)  between  the  tioo  conditions}  means,  “Neither  old  nor 
young.  Rather,  she  was  at  the  age  when  the  cow  is  strongest 
and  fittest. ’’,21  In  his  Tafsir  Al-‘Awfi  reported  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
that, 

&} 

} bright  in  its  colour}  “A  deep  yellowish  white.”13* 

I1*  Ibn  Abi  Hfitim  1 :216. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :217. 

*3*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :22 1 . 


259 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  (Part-1) 


As-Suddi  said, 


ipleasing  the  beholder ^  meaning,  that  it  pleases  those  who  see 
it.*1*  This  is  also  the  opinion  of  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Qatadah  and 
Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas.’2'  Furthermore,  Wahb  bin  Munabbih  said, 
“If  you  look  at  the  cow’s  skin,  you  will  think  that  the  sun’s  rays 
radiate  through  its  skin.”13*  The  modern  version  of  the  Tawrah 
mentions  that  the  cow  in  the  Ayah  was  red,  but  this  is  an 
error.  Or,  it  might  be  that  the  cow  was  so  yellow  that  it 
appeared  blackish  or  reddish  in  color.  Allah’s  knows  best. 

4ts  jj;  & 


iVcrily,  to  us  all  cows  are  alike$  this  means,  that  since  cows  are 
plentiful,  then  describe  this  cow  for  us  further, 

iti  c>\ 

4  And  surely,  if  Allah  luillsfy  and  if  you  further  describe  it  to  us, 


4 we  will  be  guided. $ 


jJS  'J  ;j£  <f\  j>;  ft  ju> 


4 He  says,  'It  is  a  coio  neither  trained  to  till  the  soil  nor  water  the 
fields' ^  meaning,  it  is  not  used  in  farming,  or  for  watering 
purposes.  Rather,  it  is  honorable  and  fair  looking.  ‘Abdur- 
Razzaq  said  that  Ma’mar  said  that  Qatadah  said  that, 

4id^$ 


4$ound}  means,  “The  cow  does  not  suffer  from  any  defects.”'4' 
This  is  also  the  opinion  of  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  and  Ar-Rabl‘.  Mujahid 
also  said  that  the  Ayah  means  the  cow  is  free  from  defects.'5' 
Further,  ‘Ata’  Al-Khurasani  said  that  the  Ayah  means  that  its 
legs  and  body  are  free  of  physical  defects.'61 

111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :222. 

I2'  Ibid. 

131  At-Tabari  2 :202 
141  At-Tabari  2:214. 

'5'  At-Tabari  2 : 22 5. 

161  At-Tabari  2:226. 


260 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 
Also,  Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  the  Ayah, 


iSo  they  slaughtered  it  though  they  were  near  to  not  doing  it} 
means,  “They  did  not  want  to  slaughter  it.”'1' 

This  means  that  even  after  all  the  questions  and  answers 
about  the  cow’s  description,  the  Jews  were  still  reluctant  to 
slaughter  the  cow.  This  part  of  the  Qur’an  criticized  the  Jews 
for  their  behavior,  because  their  only  goal  was  to  be  stubborn, 
and  this  is  why  they  nearly  did  not  slaughter  the  cow.  Also, 
TJbaydah,  Mujahid,  Wahb  bin  Munabbih,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  and 
‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Zayd  bin  Aslam  said,  “The  Jews  bought 
the  cow  with  a  large  amount  of  money.”*21  There  is  a 
difference  of  opinion  over  this. 


tiles'  Chi  v T  U  L-iJ 

^  ■  vr '  jyih  J^ll)  p^=Uj y  ijil 


472.  And  (remember)  when  you  killed  a  man  and  disagreed 
among  yourselves  as  to  the  crime.  But  Allah  brought  forth  that 
which  you  were  Taktumun .} 

473.  So  We  said:  " Strike  him  (the  dead  man)  with  a  piece  of  it 
(the  cow).''  Thus  Allah  brings  the  dead  to  life  and  shows  you 
His  Ay  at  (proofs,  evidences,  etc.)  so  that  you  may 
understand.} 


Bringing  the  murdered  Man  back  to  Life 

Al-Bukhari  said  that, 


$And  disagreed  among  yourselves  as  to  the  crime}  means, 
“Disputed.”*3* 

This  is  also  the  Tafsir  of  Mujahid.  ‘Ata’  Al-Khurasani  and  Ad- 
Dahhak  said,  “Disputed  about  this  matter.”*4*  Also,  Ibn  Jurayj 
said  that, 

111  At-Tabari  2:219. 

*2*  At-Tabari  2:221. 

*3*  Fath  Al-Bari  6 :506 
*4*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :229 . 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  (Part-1 ) 


262 


£2  jiS 


iAnd  (remember)  when  you  killed  a  man  and  disagreed  among 
yourselves  as  to  the  crime ^  means,  some  of  them  said,  “You  killed 
him,”  while  the  others  said,  “No  you  killed  him.”1'1  This  is  also 
the  Tafsir  of  ‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Zayd  bin  Aslam.|2)  Mujahid 
said  that, 


iBut  Allah  brought  forth  that  which  you  were  Taktumiin >  means, 
“what  you  were  hiding.  ”!3) 

Allah  said, 


4 So  We  said:  "Strike  him  (the  dead  man)  with  a  piece  of  it  (the 
cow)"}  meaning,  “any  part  of  the  cow  will  produce  the  miracle 
(if  they  struck  the  dead  man  with  it).”  We  were  not  told  which 
part  of  the  cow  they  used,  as  this  matter  does  not  benefit  us 
either  in  matters  of  life  or  religion.  Otherwise,  Allah  would  have 
made  it  clear  for  us.  Instead,  Allah  made  this  matter  vague,  so 
this  is  why  we  should  leave  it  vague.  Allah’s  statement, 

4  ioi'  ^ 


iThus  Allah  brings  the  dead  to  life}  means,  “They  struck  him  with 
it,  and  he  came  back  to  life.”  This  Ayah  demonstrates  Allah’s 
ability  in  bringing  the  dead  back  to  life.  Allah  made  this 
incident  proof  against  the  Jews  that  the  Resurrection  shall 
occur,  and  ended  their  disputing  and  stubbornness  over  the 
dead  person. 

Allah  mentioned  His  bringing  the  dead  back  to  life  in  five 
instances  in  Surat  Al-Baqarah.  First  Allah  said, 

ifr*  ?} 

4 Then  We  raised  you  up  after  your  death He  then  mentioned  the 
story  about  the  cow.  Allah  also  mentioned  the  story  of  those 
who  escaped  death  in  their  land,  while  they  were  numbering  in 


111  At-Jabari  2:225. 

121  At-Tabari  2:225. 

I3*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :229 . 


262 


Tafsir  [bn  Kathir 


the  thousands.  He  also  mentioned  the  story  of  the  Prophet  who 
passed  by  a  village  that  was  destroyed,  the  story  of  Abraham 
and  the  four  birds,  and  the  land  that  comes  back  to  life  after  it 
has  died.  All  these  incidents  and  stories  alert  us  to  the  fact  that 
bodies  shall  again  become  whole,  after  they  were  rotten.  The 
proof  of  Resurrection  is  also  reiterated  in  Allah’s  statement, 


Ufj  'frpj 


ot 

S3 


iAnd  a  sign  for  them  is  the  dead  land.  We  give  it  life,  and  We 
bring  forth  from  it  grains,  so  that  they  eat  thereof.  And  We 
have  made  therein  gardens  of  date  palms  and  grapes,  and  We 
have  caused  springs  of  water  to  gush  forth  therein .  So  that  they 
may  eat  of  the  fruit  thereof  -  and  their  hands  made  it  not. 
Will  they  not  then  give  thanks ?$  (36:33-35). 


’Jy^i  U  jjQ-1  Si  f  ^43  il'i  S*  fejli  vili 

US  <iii  *1  ,‘j.  j.  Cj  q  ooj  iiiit  ii.  i>Vj  ii* 


4  vV'.t".-.  i4: 


.... 


474.  Tlten  after  that  your  hearts  were  hardened  and  became  as 
stones  or  even  worse  in  hardness.  And  indeed,  there  are  stones 
out  of  which  rivers  gush  forth,  and  indeed,  there  are  of  them 
(stones)  which  split  asunder  so  that  ivater  floios  from  them,  and 
indeed,  there  are  of  them  (stones)  which  fall  down  for  fear  of 
Allah.  And  Allah  is  not  unaware  of  what  you  do.$ 


The  Harshness  of  the  Jews 

Allah  criticized  the  Children  of  Israel  because  they  witnessed 
the  tremendous  signs  and  the  Ayat  of  Allah,  including 
bringing  the  dead  back  to  life,  yet, 

iTIieti  after  that  your  hearts  were  hardened}. 

So  their  hearts  were  like  stones  that  never  become  soft.  This 
is  why  Allah  forbade  the  believers  from  imitating  the  Jews 
when  He  said, 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  (Part-1) 


263 


lyj'  V>  j*  4>  t*j  ^  ^=y}  ptv'*  ^-‘■■*:  0^  ' ce^JJ  o\" 

4  J’  .ijiyj  *^0  prJ*  J  ■>»  OiV>  jl^6  j(Li  J_j  Jt 


4Has  not  the  time  come  for  the  hearts  of  those  who  believe  (in 
the  Oneness  of  Allah  -  Islamic  Monotheism)  to  be  affected  by 
Allah's  Reminder  (this  Qur'an),  and  that  which  has  been 
revealed  of  the  truth,  lest  they  become  as  those  zvho  received  the 
Scripture  (the  Tawralt)  and  the  Injtl  (Gospel))  before  (i.e.  Jeivs 
and  Christians),  and  the  term  was  prolonged  for  them  and  so 
their  hearts  were  hardened?  And  many  of  them  were  Fdsiquti 
(the  rebellious,  the  disobedient  to  Allah)}  (57:16). 

In  his  Tafslr,  Al-‘Awfi  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “When  the 
dead  man  was  struck  with  a  part  of  the  cow,  he  stood  up  and 
became  more  alive  than  he  ever  was.  He  was  asked,  ‘Who 
killed  you?’  He  said,  ‘My  nephews  killed  me.’  He  then  died 
again.  His  nephews  said,  after  Allah  took  his  life  away,  T3y 
Allah!  We  did  not  kill  him’  and  denied  the  truth  while  they 
knew  it.  Allah  said, 

4 And  became  as  stones  or  even  zvorse  in  hardness}.’^ 


And  by  the  passage  of  time,  the  hearts  of  the  Children  of 
Israel  were  unlikely  to  accept  any  admonishment,  even  after 
the  miracles  and  signs  they  withnessed.  Their  hearts  became 
harder  than  stones,  with  no  hope  of  ever  softening. 
Sometimes,  springs  and  rivers  burst  out  of  stones,  some 
stones  split  and  water  comes  out  of  them,  even  if  there  are  no 
springs  or  rivers  around  them,  sometimes  stones  fall  down 
from  mountaintops  out  of  their  fear  of  Allah.  Muhammad  bin 
Ishaq  narrated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that, 


ujj  ~~l  C!  o\j  CJ  ^  ^ 

yjs.  A.  MZ  tJ 


iAnd  indeed,  there  are  stones  out  of  zvhich  rivers  gush  forth,  and 
indeed,  there  are  of  them  (stones)  which  split  asunder  so  that  water 
floios  from  them,  and  indeed,  there  are  of  them  (stones)  which  fall 


m 


At-Tabari  2 :234 . 


264 


Tafsir  ton  Kathfr 

down  for  fear  of  Allah),  means,  “Some  stones  are  softer  than 
your  hearts,  they  acknowledge  the  truth  that  you  are  being 
called  to, 

4 jjilju  lli  JjOo  ill  Cj) 

iAnd  Allah  is  not  unaware  of  what  you  do).”^^ 


Solid  Inanimate  Objects  possess  a  certain  Degree  of 
Awareness 


Some  claimed  that  the  Ayat  mentioned  the  stones  being 
humble  as  a  metaphor.  However,  Ar-Razi,  Al-Qurtubi  and 
other  Imams  said  that  there  is  no  need  for  this  explanation, 
because  Allah  creates  this  characteristic  -  humbleness  -  in 
stones.  For  instance,  Allah  said, 


4^  * ‘“l)  ^ 


iTruly,  We  did  offer  Al-Amdnah  (the  trust)  to  the  heavens  and 
tlte  earth,  and  the  mountains,  but  they  declined  to  bear  it  and 
were  afraid  of  it  (i.c.  afraid  of  Allah’s  torment)?  (33:72), 

4 Li  *i 

4The  seven  heavens  and  the  earth  and  all  that  is  therein,  glorify 
Him)  (17:44), 


iAnd  the  stars  and  the  trees  both  prostrate  themselves  (to 
Allah))  (55:6), 


4i&  iUii 


)Have  they  not  observed  things  that  Allah  has  created  :  (how) 
their  shadows  incline)  (16:48), 


4o'»jti>  Liit  LI  Is  4 


iThey  both  said:  “We  come  willingly.’’)  (41:11), 

u*  U>»  jJ4 

iHad  We  sent  down  this  Qur'an  on  a  mountain)  (59:21),  and, 


m 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :233 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (50  -  74)  (Part-1) 


2  65 


ijlli  Giie  ‘fj.  |-1  j^UJj  ^ 

4Anrf  they  wi//  say  to  their  skins,  "Why  do  you  testify  against 
us?"  They  will  say:  ". Allah  has  caused  us  to  speak (41:21). 

It  is  recorded  in  the  Sahih  that  the  Prophet  s§  said, 

Ll>*j  IjLftD 


“77»s  (Mount  Uliud)  is  a  mount  that  loves  us  and  that  we  love .»m 


Similarly,  the  compassion  of  the  stump  of  the  palm  tree  for 
the  Prophet  sfe  as  confirmed  in  authentic  narrations.  In  Sahih 
Muslim  it  is  recorded  that  the  Prophet  jfe  said, 


•  jSll  ji  Jj  {Jj-  jUw  '>»*>•  <-* 


«/  know  a  stone  in  Makkah  that  used  to  greet  me  with  the 
Saldm  before  l  was  sent.  I  recognize  this  stone  now. »|21 

He  said  about  the  Black  Stone  that, 

tyOJi  ^  pilM  jj  l;u 


«On  the  Day  of  Resurrection  it  will  testify  for  those  who  kiss 
if.»'3' 


There  are  several  other  texts  with  this  meaning.  The  scholars 
of  the  Arabic  language  disagreed  over  the  meaning  of  Allah’s 
statement, 

isJ  3^ 


i And  became  as  stones  or  even  worse  in  hardness $  after  agreeing 
that  ‘or’  here  is  not  being  used  to  reflect  doubt.  Some  scholars 
said  that  ‘or’  here  means,  ‘and’.  So  the  meaning  becomes,  “As 
hard  as  stones,  and  harder.”  For  instance,  Allah  said, 

f  £#'*  pr-i 

iAnd  obey  not  a  sinner  or  a  disbeliever  among  them$  (76:24), 
and, 


■) 


111  FathAl-Bdri  6:98. 
121  Muslim  3  : 1782. 
'3'  Ahmad  1  :266. 


266 


Tgjsir  Ibn  Kathir 


4To  cut  off  all  excuses  or  to  warn}  (77:6). 


Some  other  scholars  said  that  ‘or’  here  means,  ‘rather’. 
Hence,  the  meaning  becomes,  ‘As  hard  as  stones.  Rather, 
harder.’  For  instance,  Allah  said, 


4.A  section  of  them  fear  men  as  they  fear  Allah  or  even  more } 
(4:77), 


i  J)1 

iAnd  We  sent  him  to  a  hundred  thousand  (people)  or  even 
more }  (37:147),  and, 

vli  J&*} 

4 And  xv as  at  a  distance  of  two  bows ’  length  or  (even)  nearer} 
(53:9). 

Some  other  scholars  said  that  this  Ayah  means  their  hearts 
are  only  of  two  types,  as  hard  as  stone  or  harder  than  stone. 
Further,  Ibn  Jarir  commented  that  this  Tafsir  means  that 
some  of  their  hearts  are  as  hard  as  stone  and  some  hearts  are 
harder  than  stone.*1*  Ibn  Jarir  said  that  he  favored  this  last 
Tafsir,  although  the  others  are  plausible.  I  -  Ibn  Kathlr  -  say 
that  the  last  Tafsir  is  similar  to  Allah’s  statement, 

iTheir  likeness  is  as  the  likeness  of  one  xvho  kindled  a  fire} 
(2:17),  and  then  His  statement, 


ip.l S2 

iOr  like  a  rainstorm  from  the  sky}  (2:19). 

It  is  also  similar  to  Allah’s  statement, 

4 -As  for  those  who  disbelieved,  their  deeds  are  like  a  mirage  in  a 
desert}  (24:39),  and  then  His  statement, 

m 


At-Tabari  2  :236. 


267 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (75  -  100}  (Parti) 


iOr  (the  state  of  a  disbeliever)  is  like  the  darkness  in  a  vast 
deep  sea}  (24:40). 

This  then  means  that  some  of  them  are  like  the  first 
example,  and  some  others  are  like  the  second  example.  Allah 
knows  best. 


d)  lijj  ll*'«  'jlfi  ,Y9  ii;  |*ij  *jli*  U 

"jjl  *5$  ^  ^  'jJ'* 

/ ,  ■  ;,•>  .//  ✓  i  >  ,/  /•"  *»?  *5  f  -* 

X  WyO^Jj'd  W  ^  (*^  O' 


4  75.  Do  you  (faithful  believers)  covet  that  they  will  believe  in 
your  religion  inspite  of  the  fact  that  a  party  of  them  (Jeivish 
rabbis)  used  to  hear  the  Word  of  Allah  (the  Tawrdh),  then  they 
used  to  change  it  knoivingly  after  they  understood  it?} 

476.  And  when  they  (Jews)  meet  those  ivho  believe  (Muslims), 
they  say,  "We  believe,"  but  when  they  meet  one  another  in 
private,  they  say,  " Shall  you  (Jews)  tell  them  (Muslims)  zohat 
Allah  has  revealed  to  you  that  they  (Muslims)  may  argue  with 
you  (Jews)  about  it  before  your  Lord?"  Have  you  (Jeios)  then  no 
understanding?} 

477.  Knoiv  they  (Jews)  not  that  Allah  knows  what  they  conceal 
and  what  they  reveal?} 


There  was  little  Hope  that  the  Jews  Who  lived  during 
the  Time  of  the  Prophet  m  could  have  believed 

Allah  said, 

4'j£&f} 


4 Do  you  covet}  O  believers. 


ip  »>Ji  & 


iThat  they  will  believe  in  your  religion >  meaning,  that  these 
people  would  obey  you?  They  are  the  deviant  sect  of  Jews 
whose  fathers  witnessed  the  clear  signs  but  their  hearts 
became  hard  afterwards.  Allah  said  next, 


p-te  05*^3  jo  -Hj? 


268 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

iltispitc  of  the  fact  that 
a  party  of  them  (Jewish 
rabbis)  used  to  hear  the 
Word  of  Allah  (the 
Tawrah),  then  they  used 
to  change  it}  meaning, 
distort  its  meaning, 

iafter  they  understood 
it}.  They  understood 
well,  yet  they  used  to 
defy  the  truth, 

£3} 

4 knowingly },  being 

fully  aware  of  their 
erroneous 
interpretations  and 
corruption.  This 
statement  is  similar 
to  Allah’s  statement, 

nr?" 

iSo,  because  of  their  violation  of  their  covenant.  We  cursed 
them  and  tnade  their  hearts  grow  hard.  They  change  the  words 
from  their  (right)  places}  (5:13). 

Qatadah  commented  that  Allah’s  statement; 

**  **  x  ^  I''  .  f  K  « ^ 

U  jjf 

iThen  they  used  to  change  it  knowingly  after  they  understood  ify 
“They  are  the  Jews  who  used  to  hear  Allah’s  Words  and  then 
alter  them  after  they  understood  and  comprehended  them.”*11 
Also,  Mujahid  said,  “Those  who  used  to  alter  it  and  conceal  its 

m 


7  \y  35  Vi 

pJLjO  4jjl  jfl 

p* o]j V l  OJK*) 

$  s&yi 

&  > 


T 0  f  ^  V XA  Y  jjtfl 

Sis  0 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :236 . 


2  69 


Surah  2-  Al-Baqarah  (75  -  100)  fPflrf-1) 

truths;  they  were  their  scholars.”*1'  Also,  Ibn  Wahb  said  that 
Ibn  Zayd  commented, 


4  j/sed  to  hear  the  Word  of  Allah  (the  Tawrah),  then  they  used  to 
change  it}  “They  altered  the  Tawrah  that  Allah  revealed  to  them, 
making  it  say  that  the  lawful  is  unlawful  and  the  prohibited  is 
allowed,  and  that  what  is  right  is  false  and  that  what  is  false  is 
right.  So  when  a  person  seeking  the  truth  comes  to  them  with  a 
bribe,  they  judge  his  case  by  the  Book  of  Allah,  but  when  a 
person  comes  to  them  seeking  to  do  evil  with  a  bribe,  they  take 
out  the  other  (distorted)  book,  in  which  it  is  stated  that  he  is  in 
the  right.  When  someone  comes  to  them  who  is  not  seeking 
what  is  right,  nor  offering  them  bribe,  then  they  enjoin 
righteousness  on  him.  This  is  why  Allah  said  to  them, 


iEnjoin  you  Al-Birr  (piety  and  righteousness  and  every  act  of 
obedience  to  Allah)  on  the  people  and  you  forget  (to  practise  it) 
yourselves,  while  you  recite  the  Scripture  (the  Tawrah)!  Have 
you  then  no  sense?}  (2:44)”121 


The  Jews  knew  the  Truth  of  the  Prophet  jg,  but 
disbelieved  in  Him 

Allah  said  next, 

4 d)  |  v*3*?  liD  liali  ijjii  iyut*  ujJh  j_ji) 

4 And  when  they  (Jews)  meet  those  who  believe  (Muslims),  they  say, 
"We  believe",  but  when  they  meet  one  another  in  private..}. 
Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented, 

cjji'  i_>U  \'i\j} 

iAnd  when  they  (Jews)  meet  those  who  believe  (Muslims),  they  say, 
"We  believe "}  “They  believe  that  Muhammad  sfe  is  the 
Messenger  of  Allah,  “But  he  was  only  sent  for  you  (Arabs)’”131 
However,  when  they  meet  each  other  they  say,  “Do  not  convey 

111  At-Jabari  2:245. 

121  At-Tabari  2:246. 

131  At-Tabari  2 :250 


270 


Tafsir  ton  Kathfr 


the  news  about  this  Prophet  to  the  Arabs,  because  you  used  to 
ask  Allah  to  grant  you  victory  over  them  when  he  came,  but  he 
was  sent  to  them  (not  to  you).”  Allah  then  revealed, 


^  iH*-***?  V*-  li Ij  &I1  Ijltt  i£*l»  i/jji  Iji)  tyj} 

**  '<£&■ 


iAnd  when  they  (Jews)  meet  those  who  believe  (Muslims),  they 
say,  "We  believe but  when  they  meet  one  another  in  private, 
they  say,  "Shall  you  (Jews)  tell  them  (Muslims)  what  Allah  has 
revealed  to  you,  that  they  (Muslims)  may  argue  ivith  you  (Jews) 
about  it  before  your  Lord?"} 


meaning,  “If  you  admit  to  them  that  he  is  a  I^ophet,  knowing 
that  Allah  took  the  covenant  from  you  to  follow  him,  they  will 
know  that  Muhammad  is  the  Prophet  that  we  were  waiting  for 
and  whose  coming  we  find  foretold  of  in  our  Book.  Therefore, 
do  not  believe  in  him  and  deny  him.”  Allah  said, 


to  sij/j  £  i&"  f 


iKnozv  they  (Jeivs)  not  that  Allah  knoios  what  they  conceal  and 
what  they  reveal?}. 

Al-Hasan  Al-Basri  said,  “When  the  Jews  met  the  believers 
they  used  to  say,  We  believe.’  When  they  met  each  other, 
some  of  them  would  say,  ‘Do  not  talk  to  the  companions  of 
Muhammad  about  what  Allah  has  foretold  in  your  Book,  so 
that  the  news  (that  Muhammad  is  the  Final  Messenger)  does 
not  become  a  proof  for  them  against  you  with  your  Lord,  and, 
thus,  you  will  win  the  dispute.’”*11  Further,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah 
said  about  Allah’s  statement, 

^  yy . Uj  t*  piL  o*  ijjjLu 

iKncno  they  (Jews)  not  that  Allah  knows  what  they  conceal  and  ivhat 
they  reveal?},  “Meaning  their  secret  denial  and  rejection  of 
Muhammad,  si  although  they  find  his  coming  recorded  in  their 
Book.”  This  is  also  the  Tafsir  of  Qatadah.  Al-Hasan  commented 
on, 


m 


Ibn  Abi  Hfitim  1 :239 . 


271 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (75  -  100 )  (Parkll 

iThat  Allah  knows  what  they  conceal },  “What  they  concealed 
refers  to  when  they  were  alone  with  each  other  away  from  the 
Companions  of  Muhammad  jg.  Then  they  would  forbid  each 
other  from  conveying  the  news  that  Allah  revealed  to  them  in 
their  Book  to  the  Companions  of  Muhammad  sg,  fearing  that 
the  Companions  would  use  this  news  (about  the  truth  of 
Muhammad  sg)  against  them  before  their  Lord.”*1* 


4 And  what  they  reveal ?}  meaning,  when  they  said  to  the 
Companions  of  Muhammad  sg, 


4  We  believe},  as  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Ar-Rabl‘  and  Qatadah  stated.121 


'  \  o’  -it*'  .f  *>  • , ^ 

jmJJ  vA.ojUii  V>  ,*»  jjj  U, 

if  t  s  *  (>''»/  fi 

Jjji  uli 


{j*  tXjb  o^yu 

&  (4^  &JJ 


478.  And  there  are  among  them  (Jews)  ‘Ummyyun  (unlettered) 
people,  who  know  not  the  Book,  but  they  trust  upon  Amdni 
(false  desires)  and  they  but  guess.} 

479.  Tlten  woe  to  those  who  write  the  book  with  their  own 
hands  and  tlten  say,  "This  is  from  Allah,”  to  purchase  with  it  a 
little  price!  Woe  to  them  for  what  their  hands  have  written  and 
woe  to  them  for  that  they  earn  thereby.} 


The  Meaning  of  ‘UmmU 

Allah  said, 

iAnd  there  are  among  them  Ummyyun  people}  meaning,  among 
the  People  of  the  Book,  as  Mujahid  stated.  Ummyyun,  is  plural 
for  Ummi,  that  is,  a  person  who  does  not  write,  as  Abu  Al- 
‘Aliyah,  Ar-Rabi*,  Qatadah,  Ibrahim  An-Nakhal  and  others  said. 
This  meaning  is  clarified  by  Allah’s  statement, 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :240. 

121  Ibid. 


272 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


iWho  know  not  the  Book ^  meaning,  are  they  not  aware  of  what  is 
in  it.'1' 


Ummi  was  one  of  the  descriptions  of  the  Prophet  jg  because 
he  was  unlettered.  For  instance,  Allah  said, 


4  &  i£Z 


^ Neither  did  yon  (O  Muhammad  sg)  read  any  book  before  it 
(this  Qur’an)  nor  did  you  write  any  book  (zolmtsoever)  with 
your  right  hand.  In  that  case,  indeed,  the  followers  of  falsehood 
might  have  doubted }  (29:48). 


Also,  the  Prophet  sg  said, 

“  I  I  j£aj  ’uli  I  i .  -  ~ 


ij  lif  uu 


“We  are  an  Ummi  nation,  neither  zoriting  nor  calculating.  The 
(lunar)  month  is  like  this,  this  and  this  (i.e.  thirty  or  tzoenty- 
nine  days .»*21 

This  Hadith  stated  that  Muslims  do  not  need  to  rely  on 
books,  or  calculations  to  decide  the  timings  of  their  acts  of 
worship.  Allah  also  said, 

4  *4o 


4He  if  is  Wio  sent  among  the  Ummiyyin  ones  a  Messenger 
(Muhammad  jfi)  from  among  themselves }  (62:2). 


The  Explanation  of  Amani 

Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  Allah’s  statement, 

4But  they  trust  upon  Amani}  means,  “It  is  just  a  false  statement 
that  they  utter  with  their  tongues.”131  It  was  also  said  that 
Amani  means  “wishes  and  hopes’.  Mujahid  commented,  “Allah 
described  the  Ummiyyin  as  not  understanding  any  of  the  Book 
that  Allah  sent  down  to  Musa,  yet  they  create  lies  and 

111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :241 . 

121  Path  Al-Bari  4:151 . 

131  At-Tabari  2  :261 . 


273 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (75  -  100 )  (Parti} 

falsehood.”*1’  Therefore,  the  word  Amani  mentioned  here  refers 
to  lying  and  falsehood.  Mujahid  said  that  Allah’s  statement, 

V!  |U 

iAnd  they  but  guess}  means,  “They  lie.”’2’  Qatadah,  Abu  Al- 
‘Aliyah  and  Ar-RabT  said  that  it  means,  “They  have  evil  false 
ideas  about  Allah. ”*3’ 


Woe  unto  Those  Criminals  among  the  Jews 

Allah  said, 

^3  ‘i-i  'jXLJ  ji'  XJ;  Si  ^  iyt&i  C/J& 


iThen  Waylutt  (woe)  to  those  who  write  the  book  with  their 
own  hands  and  then  say,  " This  is  from  Allah,”  to  purclwse 
with  it  a  little  price!}. 

This  is  another  category  of  people  among  the  Jews  who 
called  to  misguidance  with  falsehood  and  lies  about  Allah, 
thriving  on  unjustly  amassing  people’s  property.  ‘Waylun  (woe)’ 
carries  meanings  of  destruction  and  perishing,  and  it  is  a  well- 
known  word  in  the  Arabic  language.  Az-Zuhri  said  that 
TJbadydullah  bin  ‘Abdullah  narrated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “O 
Muslims!  How  could  you  ask  the  People  of  the  Book  about 
anything,  while  the  Book  of  Allah  (Qur’an)  that  He  revealed  to 
His  Prophet  jg  is  the  most  recent  Book  from  Him  and  you  still 
read  it  fresh  and  young?  Allah  told  you  that  the  People  of  the 
Book  altered  the  Book  of  Allah,  changed  it  and  wrote  another 
book  with  their  own  hands.  They  then  said,  This  book  is  from 
Allah,’  so  that  they  acquired  a  small  profit  by  it.  Hasn’t  the 
knowledge  that  came  to  you  prohibited  you  from  asking  them? 
By  Allah!  We  have  not  seen  any  of  them  asking  you  about  what 
was  revealed  to  you.”*4’  This  Hadith  was  also  collected  by  Al- 
Bukhari.’5’  Al-Hasan  Al-Basri  said,  “The  little  amount  here 

1,1  At-Jabari  2:262. 

*2’  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :242 . 

*3*  Ibid. 

*4*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :245. 

*5*  Fath  Al-Bari  5 :244 ,  13 :345  &  555 . 


275 


Silrah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (75  -  100 )  fParM) 

Allah?'}.  Hence,  the  Ayah  proclaims,  ‘if  you  had  a  promise  from 
Allah  for  that,  then  Allah  will  never  break  His  promise. 
However,  such  promise  never  existed.  Rather,  what  you  say, 
about  Allah,  you  have  no  knowledge  of  and  you  thus  utter  a  lie 
about  Him.’  Al-‘Awfi  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  about  the  Ayah, 


4And  they  (Jews)  say,  “The  Fire  shall  not  touch  us  but  for  a 
feio  numbered  days."}. 

“The  Jews  said,  The  Fire  will  only  touch  us  for  forty  days.’”1'1 
Others  added  that  this  was  the  period  during  which  the  Jews 
worshipped  the  calf. 

Also,  Al-Hafiz  Abu  Bakr  bin  Marduwyah  reported  Abu 
Hurayrah  saying, 


4>l  J JIS  4-j  sLi  sgg  <il  oJjji  ^  IsJ  UJ 
j**  ^  u'i’  J 

iJC.is  b\f)  ^liii  d  u  jui :  i jits  ji  j*  jUii 

jtJl  JaI  Abl  ^  Jtii  ^  US  £AS  ci/ 

i  J j  <J Lii  1^3  j !  \j] lii 

J^5  *  ^  J_>— o'  p-gJ  JU  V 

a?UJ.  olih  oi-ft  ^  ^l*>-  JJ*B  :  J15  Ui  U  jiJ*j  MjJli  j^ScJL- 

ji  CilS'  sLsS  jl  l :  1  jJlii  ^1p  Ui&  :Jli  jU*j 


«VW»en  Khaybar  was  conquered,  a  roasted  poisoned  sheep  was 
presented  to  the  Prophet  jg  as  a  gift  (by  the  Jews).  The 
Messenger  of  Allah  jfe  ordered,  'Assemble  before  me  all  the  Jews 
who  were  here.’  The  Jews  were  summoned  and  the  Prophet  jg 
said  (to  them),  'Who  is  your  father?'  They  replied,  'So-and-so.' 
He  said,  ‘You  have  lied;  your  father  is  so-and-so.'  They  said, 
'You  luwe  uttered  the  truth.'  He  said,  'Will  you  now  tell  me 
the  truth,  if  l  ask  you  about  something?'  They  replied,  'Yes,  O 


(i| 


At-Jabari  2 :276 . 


276 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Abul-Qdsim;  and  if  we  should  tell  a  lie,  you  will  know  our  lie 
as  you  have  about  our  fathers.'  On  that  he  asked,  Who  are  the 
people  of  tite  (Hell)  Fire?’  They  said,  We  shall  remain  in  the 
(Hell)  Fire  far  a  short  period,  and  after  that  you  will  replace  us 
in  it.’  The  Prophet  2g  said,  'May  you  be  cursed  and  humiliated 
in  it!  By  All  Ah,  we  shall  never  replace  you  in  it.’  Then  he 
asked,  Will  you  tell  me  the  truth  if  I  ask  you  a  question?'  They 
said,  'Yes,  O  Abul-Qasim.'  He  asked,  ‘ Have  you  poisoned  this 
sheep?'  They  said,  'Yes.'  He  asked,  What  made  you  do  so?' 
They  said,  We  wanted  to  know  if  you  were  a  liar,  in  which 
case  we  would  get  rid  of  you,  and  if  you  were  a  Prophet  then 
the  poison  would  not  harm  you.'®11*  Imam  Ahmad,  Al- 
Bukhari  and  An-Nasa’i  recorded  similarly.121 


CJJ  £  'pit  diijU  iiLki  J  fc} 


481.  Yes!  Whosoever  earns  evil  and  his  sin  has  surrounded 
him,  they  are  dwellers  of  the  Fire  (i.e.  Hell);  they  will  dwell 
therein  forever }. 

482.  And  those  who  believe  and  do  righteous  good  deeds,  they 
are  dwellers  of  Paradise,  they  will  dwell  therein  forever.} 

Allah  says,  the  matter  is  not  as  you  have  wished  and  hoped 
it  to  be.  Rather,  whoever  does  an  evil  deed  and  abides 
purposefully  in  his  error,  coming  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection 
with  no  good  deeds,  only  evil  deeds,  then  he  will  be  among  the 
people  of  the  Fire. 


iAnd  those  who  believe  and  do  righteous  good  deeds}  meaning, 
“They  believe  in  Allah  and  His  Messenger  sg  and  perform  the 
good  deeds  that  conform  with  the  Islamic  Law.  They  shall  be 
among  the  people  of  Paradise.”  Allah  said  in  a  similar 
statement, 


111  Daldra  An-Nubuwwah  4:256. 

^  Ahmad  2:451,  Fath  Al-Bari  6:314,  and  An-Nasat  in  Al-Kubra 
6:413. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (75  -  100)  (Part-1) 


277 


iri  A  S-^1.  j— *i  i>*  sid  'ij 

Crf>*  >*S  J*  Oi  j-*-“  si/*J  UJJ 

4-'jt'£{4>  Ojiliu  *!/j 


</f  will  not  be  in  accordance  with  your  desires  (Muslims),  nor 
those  of  the  People  of  the  Scripture  (Jews  and  Christians), 
whosoever  works  evil,  will  have  the  recompense  thereof,  and  he 
will  not  find  any  protector  or  helper  besides  Allah.  And 
whoever  does  righteous  good  deeds,  male  or  female,  and  is  a 
(true)  believer  [in  the  Oneness  of  Allah  (Muslim)],  such  will 
enter  Paradise  and  not  the  least  injustice,  even  the  size  of  a 
Naqira  (speck  on  the  back  of  a  date  stone),  will  be  done  to 
them }  (4:123-124). 

Also,  Abu  Hurayrah,  Abu  Wa’il,  ‘Ata*,  and  Al-Hasan  said 
that, 


iAnd  his  sin  has  surrounded  him}  means,  “His  Shirk  (polytheism) 
has  surrounded  him.”111  Also,  Al-A‘mash  reported  from  Abu 
Razln  that  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Khuthaym  said, 


}And  his  sin  has  surrounded  him},  “Whoever  dies  before  repenting 
from  his  wrongs.”*2’  As-Suddi  and  Abu  Razln  said  similarly.*3* 
Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Mujahid,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah  and  Ar-Rabl*  bin 
Anas  said  that, 

<4  i  - .  lv-lj  ^ 


iAtid  his  sin  has  surrounded  him}  refers  to  major  sins.’4*  All  of 
these  statements  carry  similar  meanings,  and  Allah  knows 
best. 


When  Small  Sins  gather,  They  bring  about  Destruction 

Here  we  should  mention  the  Hadlth  that  Imam  Ahmad 

111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :252. 

*2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :252 . 

*3’  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :253. 

*4’  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :253 . 


278 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlur 


recorded,  in  which  ‘Abdullah  bin  Mas'ud  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


« Beware  of  the  belittled  sins,  because  they  gather  on  a  person 
until  they  destroy  him.* 


He  then  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  gave  them  an 
example, 


'  >  '  »  j  ^  4  #  ^  *  ,*  ^  ^  +  *+  *  i  , 

l)*^  f jill  iS^ti  ijJ> jL  I fej  f>y  JiXS1 


«This  is  the  example  of  people  who  set  up  camp  on  a  flat  land, 
and  then  their  servants  came.  One  of  them  collected  some  wood 
and  another  man  collected  some  ivood  until  they  collected  a 
great  deal.  They  then  started  a  fire  and  cooked  what  they  put  on 
it.*"' 


Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that, 


Q  jpyt  iybl  oipDi  \pt  <±4%+ 


$And  those  who  believe  and  do  righteous  good  deeds,  they  are 
dwellers  of  Paradise,  they  will  dwell  therein  forever } 


“Whoever  believes  in  what  you  (Jews)  did  not  believe  in  and 
implements  what  you  refrained  from  implementing  of 
Muhammad’s  religion,  shall  acquire  Paradise  for  eternity.  Allah 
stated  that  the  recompense  for  good  or  evil  works  shall  remain 
with  its  people  for  eternity.”12’ 


0S\  sfi  £&[  ^  1  &Zr\  SIS 

^Z-Aj  •£■  •>£=£!'  ijl— jij  ojVil)  IAA» 


483.  And  (remember)  when  We  took  a  covenant  from  the 
Children  of  Israel,  (saying):  Worship  none  but  Alldh  (alone) 
and  be  dutiful  and  good  to  parents,  and  to  kindred,  and  to 
orphans  and  (the  poor),  and  speak  good  to  people  and  perform 
As-Salalt  and  give  Zakah.  Then  you  slid  back,  except  a  few  of 


111  Ahmad  1 :204. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :254. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (75  -  100)  (Part-1) 
you,  ivhile  you  are  backsliders.} 


279 


The  Covenant  that  Allah  took  from  the  Children  of 
Israel 


Allah  reminded  the  Children  of  Israel  of  the  commandments 
that  He  gave  them,  and  the  covenants  that  He  took  from  them 
to  abide  by  those  commands,  and  how  they  intentionally  and 
knowingly  turned  away  from  all  of  that.  Allah  commanded 
them  to  worship  Him  and  to  associate  none  with  Him  in 
worship,  just  as  He  has  commanded  all  of  His  creatures,  for 
this  is  why  Allah  created  them.  Allah  said. 


'0  V!  A  V  § 


4And  We  did  not  settd  any  Messenger  before  you  (O 
Muliammad  sg)  but  We  revealed  to  him  (saying) :  La  ilaha  ilia 
Ana  [none  has  the  right  to  be  worshipped  but  I  (Allah)],  so 
worship  Me  (alone  and  none  else)}  (21:25),  and, 


4 oy«  'Ll?  Ail  j,  Lwilj  j5j_ )} 


iAnd  verily,  We  have  sent  among  every  Ummah  (community, 
nation)  a  Messenger  (proclaiming):  " Worship  Allah  (alone), 
and  avoid  the  Taghut  (all  false  deities,)}  (16:36). 

This  is  the  highest  and  most  important  right,  that  is,  Allah’s 
right  that  He  be  worshipped  alone  without  partners. 

After  that  comes  the  right  of  the  creatures,  foremost,  the 
right  of  the  parents.  Allah  usually  mentions  the  rights  of  the 
parents  along  with  His  rights.  For  instance,  Allah  said, 

!)[  aj j  Ji} 


iGive  thanks  to  Me  and  to  your  parents.  Unto  Me  is  the  final 
destination}  (31:14).  Also,  Allah  said. 


$And  your  Lord  has  decreed  that  you  worship  none  but  Him. 
And  that  you  be  dutiful  to  your  parettts}  (17:23),  until, 


'Jj  il 


iAnd  give  to  the  kinsman  his  due  and  to  the  MiskTn  (poor)  and 
to  the  wayfarer}  (17:26). 


280 


Tafsfr  Urn  Kqthir 


The  Two  Sahths  record  that  Ibn  Mas*ud  said, 

t  ’■  . . .  . i 


jU  :oJ i  «l#3  'Ji.  :  Jli  jUi  <ii  J_^3  U»  :siJi 

t«i»l  Jcr"  J  :  JU  jli  :oii  djJjJljJl  :  Jli 


«/  said ,  ‘O  Messenger  of  Allah!  What  is  the  best  deed?'  He 
said,  ‘Performing  the  prayer  on  time.'  I  said,  'Then  what?'  He 
said,  'Being  kind  to  one’s  parents.’  I  said,  'Then  what?'  He 
said,  ‘Jihad  in  the  cause  of  Allah.  '»,1) 

Allah  then  said, 


J'jI 


iand  to  orphans >  meaning,  the  young  who  have  no  fathers  to 
fend  for  them. 


iand  Al-Masakin  (the  poor)},  plural  for  Miskin,  the  one  who  does 
not  find  what  he  needs  to  spend  on  himself  and  his  family.  We 
will  discuss  these  categories  when  we  explain  the  Ayah  of  Surat 
An-Nisa'  where  Allah  said, 


•(Worship  Allah  and  join  none  with  Him  (in  worship);  and  do 
good  to  parents}  (4:36). 

Allah’s  statement. 


iand  speak  good  to  people}  meaning,  say  good  words  to  them  and 
be  lenient  with  them,  this  includes  commanding  good  and 
forbidding  evil.  Al-Hasan  Al-Basri  commented  on  Allah’s 
statement, 

ojdii  ')sj} 

iand  speak  good  to  people},  “  The  good  saying’  means 
commanding  good  and  forbidding  evil,  and  being  patient  and 
forgiving.  The  ‘good  words  to  people’,  as  Allah  commanded,  also 
includes  every  good  type  of  behavior  that  Allah  is  pleased 
with.”'21  Imam  Ahmad  narrated  that  Abu  Dharr  said  that  the 

Fath  Al-Bari  6 :  5,  and  Muslim  1  :89. 

•2|  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :258. 


281 


Swra/t  2.  Al-Baqarah  (75  -  100)  (Part-1) 


Prophet  jg  said, 


“tj  11a.*  y  ^  JL>o  *J  ijl J  U-»t  kjj yJL}\ 


“Do  not  belittle  any  form  of  righteousness,  and  even  if  you  did 
not  find  any  good  deed  except  meeting  your  brother  with  a 
smiling  face,  then  do  so.* 

This  Hadith  was  also  collected  by  Muslim  in  his  Sahth  and 
At-Tirmidhi,  who  graded  it  Sahih)1^ 

Allah  commands  the  servants  to  say  good  words  to  people, 
after  He  commanded  them  to  be  kind  to  them,  thereby 
mentioning  two  categories  of  manners:  good  speech  and  good 
actions.  He  then  emphasized  the  command  to  worship  Him 
and  the  command  to  do  good,  ordaining  the  prayer  and  the 
Zakah, 

iy'o  \y-JAj) 


iand  perform  As-Salah  and  give  Zakah).  Allah  informed  us  that 
the  People  of  the  Book,  except  for  a  few  among  them,  ignored 
these  orders,  that  is,  they  knowingly  and  intentionally 
abandoned  them.  Allah  ordered  this  Ummah  similarly  in  Surat 
An-Nisa’  when  He  said. 


US  v 


'tj  sSt  lji^»S> 

K  ujJJf  j}  pfii 


4 Worship  Allah  and  join  none  with  Him  (in  worship);  and  do 
good  to  parents,  kinsfolk,  orphans,  Al-Masakin  (the  poor),  the 
neighbor  who  is  near  of  kin,  the  neighbor  who  is  a  stranger,  the 
companion  by  your  side,  the  wayfarer  (you  meet),  and  those 
(servants)  whom  your  right  hands  possess.  Verily,  Allah  does 
not  like  such  as  are  proud  and  boastful)  (4:36). 


Of  these  orders,  this  Ummah  has  practiced  what  no  other 
nation  before  it  has,  and  all  praise  is  due  to  Allah. 

>-*!»  fxA  f  v  j£iL.  C.ii.1  i\j) 

&  (^i  p£  p 

111  Ahmad  5:173,  Muslim  4:2026,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  5 :526 . 


282 


Ta/sir  Ibn  Katlur 


Ji  mu  ~ 

'i.Jrji'Zi  SZi-Si  itf 

* >  f  >*  •  £  v*1 ' {  V  /  « 

*-  y'f~~  *  ^  —  fl) 

0^  iii'j  fr'fij  p-$4*^Ji/+k’(r£^i5  W  f^S 

l^iiy (3$1  $ 

Jiij  dyj-a^ 

4lj  Jjtj  c*&r) ' 

ijlSjf^i 


jU  g'jxtij  jf>l 

r«-W  <^=^  tj* 
'f\i  .  *-'  r  > 

v_iii  '^"  *  I  ojr^y^ 

i/*  »Dr  Oi  u<f«~j 

&  vi  Jj/i  jiL; 
j. «.'.jl?  j* Li  j)'  4 

ii(  ttj  y'iit  £3  i\  OJV. 

,.V .  Ojl*  ■’  L*-C>  4^^ 

ui(  V£3I  l&if  y» 
v'-Li'  jt^ic  ■  fl S*i  V/5VL 
4'^^ir^t  f*  Vj 

484.  And  (remember) 
when  We  foo/r  your 
covenant  (saying) :  Shed 
not  the  blood  of  your 
(people),  nor  turn  out 
your  oxvn  people  from 
their  dwellings.  Then, 


(this)  you  ratified  and  (to  this)  you  bore  witness.} 


485.  After  this,  it  is  you  zoho  kill  one  another  and  drive  out  a 
party  of  you  from  their  homes,  assist  (their  enemies)  against 
them,  in  sin  and  transgression.  And  if  they  come  to  you  as 
captives,  you  ransom  them,  although  their  expulsion  ivas 
forbidden  to  you .  Then  do  you  believe  in  a  part  of  the  Book  and 
reject  the  rest?  Then  what  is  the  recompense  of  those  who  do  so 
among  you,  except  disgrace  in  the  life  of  this  world,  and  on  the 
Day  of  Resurrection  they  shall  be  consigned  to  the  most 
grievous  tonnait.  And  Alldlt  is  not  unaware  of  what  you  do.} 


486.  Those  are  they  who  have  bought  the  life  of  this  world  at 
the  price  of  the  Hereafter.  Their  torment  shall  not  be  lightened 
nor  shall  they  be  helped.} 


283 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (75  -  100 )  (Part-1) 


The  Terms  of  the  Covenant  and  their  Breach  of  It 


Allah  criticized  the  Jews  who  lived  in  Al-Madinah  during  the 
time  of  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg.  They  used  to  suffer,  because 
of  the  armed  conflicts  between  the  tribes  of  Al-Madinah,  Aws 
and  Khazraj.  Before  Islam,  the  Aws  and  Khazraj  worshipped 
idols,  and  many  battles  took  place  between  them.  There  were 
three  Jewish  tribes  in  Al-Madinah  at  that  time,  Banu  Qaynuqa* 
and  Banu  An-Nadlr,  the  allies  of  the  Khazraj,  and  Banu 
Qurayzah,  who  used  to  be  the  allies  of  the  Aws.  When  war 
erupted  between  Aws  and  Khazraj,  their  Jewish  allies  would 
assist  them.  The  Jew  would  kill  his  Arab  enemy,  and 
sometimes  they  also  killed  Jews  who  were  the  allies  of  the  other 
Arab  tribe,  although  the  Jews  were  prohibited  from  killing  each 
other  according  to  clear  religious  texts  in  their  Books.  They 
would  also  drive  each  other  from  their  homes  and  loot  whatever 
furniture  and  money  they  could.  When  the  war  ended,  the 
victorious  Jews  would  release  the  prisoners  from  the  defeated 
party,  according  to  the  rulings  of  the  Tawrah.  This  is  why  Allah 
said, 


iThen  do  you  believe  in  a  part  of  the  Scripture  and  reject  the  rest?} 
Allah  said. 


i'fei  oi  jfcLL.  £23 


iAnd  (remember)  when  We  took  your  covenant  (saying) :  Shed 
not  the  blood  of  your  (people),  nor  turn  out  your  own  people 
from  their  dwellings .} 


meaning,  “Do  not  kill  each  other,  nor  expel  one  another  from 
their  homes,  nor  participate  in  fighting  against  them.”  Allah 
mentioned  the  word  Your  own’  here,  just  as  He  said  in 
another  Ayah. 


i&jl  Up-fr  #S  ffctf  m  JI  i 


iSo  turn  in  repentance  to  your  Creator  and  kill  yourselves,  that  will 
be  better  for  you  with  your  Creator }  (2:54)  because  the  followers  of 
one  religion  are  just  like  one  soul.  Also,  the  Messenger  of  Allah 
Sg  said, 


284 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


« j+D\j  JJji  3  j^ii-  Z. 


aThe  example  of  the  believers  in  their  kindness,  mercy  and 
sympathy  to  each  other  is  the  example  of  one  body,  when  an 
organ  of  it  falls  ill,  the  rest  of  the  body  rushes  to  its  aid  in  fever 
and  sleeplessness.^  Allah’s  statement, 


iThen,  (this)  you  ratified  and  (to  this)  you  bore  witness. }  means, 
“You  testified  that  you  know  of  the  covenant  find  that  you  were 
witnesses  to  it.” 


Oi  (Xu  \-juf 


iAfter  this,  it  is  you  who  kill  one  another  and  drive  out  a  party  of 
you  from  their  homes}.  Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  bin  Yasar  reported 
that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented  on  the  Ayah, 


ai  (X-i  Oyrftj 


iAfter  this,  it  is  you  who  kill  one  another  and  drive  out  a  party 
of  you  from  their  homes}^ 

“Allah  mentioned  what  they  were  doing,  and  that  in  the 
Tawrah  He  had  prohibited  them  from  shedding  each  other’s 
blood,  and  required  them  to  free  their  prisoners.  Now  they 
were  divided  into  two  camps  in  Al-Madlnah,  Banu  Qaynuqa*, 
who  were  the  allies  of  the  Khazraj,  and  An-Nadlr  and 
Qurayzah,  who  were  the  allies  of  the  Aws.  When  fighting 
erupted  between  Aws  and  Khazraj,  Banu  Qaynuqa*  would  fight 
along  with  the  Khazraj,  while  Banu  An-Nadlr  and  Qurayzah 
would  fight  along  with  the  Aws.  Each  Jewish  camp  would  fight 
against  their  Jewish  brethren  from  the  other  camp.  They 
would  shed  each  other’s  blood,  although  they  had  the  Tawrah 
with  them,  and  they  knew  their  rights  and  dues.  Meanwhile, 
the  Aws  and  Khazraj  were  polytheists  who  worshipped  idols. 
They  did  not  know  about  Paradise,  the  Fire,  Resurrection, 
Divine  Books  the  lawful  and  prohibited.  When  the  war  would 
end,  the  Jews  would  ransom  their  prisoners  and  implement 


111  Muslim  4:1999. 

121  Ibn  Abi  H&tim  1 :261 . 


285 


Sumh  2.  Al-Baqarah  (75  -  100 )  (Parti} 


the  Tawrah.  Consequently,  Banu  Qaynuqa'  would  ransom  their 
prisoners  who  were  captured  by  the  Aws,  while  Banu  An-Nadir 
and  Qurayzah  would  ransom  their  prisoners  who  were  captured 
by  the  Khazraj.  They  would  also  ask  for  blood  money.  During 
these  wars,  they  would  kill  whomever  (Jews  or  Arabs)  they 
could,  while  helping  the  polytheists  against  their  brethren. 
Therefore,  Allah  reminded  them  of  this  when  He  said, 

lum 


$Then  do  you  believe  in  a  part  of  the  Scripture  and  reject  the 
rest?  ^ 


This  Ayah  means,  ‘Do  you  ransom  them  according  to  the 
rulings  of  the  Tawrah,  yet  kill  them  while  the  Tawrah  forbade 
you  from  killing  them  and  from  expelling  them  from  their 
homes?  The  Tawrah  also  commanded  that  you  should  not  aid 
the  polytheists  and  those  who  associate  with  Allah  in  the 
worship  against  your  brethren.  You  do  all  this  to  acquire  the 
life  of  this  world.’  I  was  informed  that  the  behavior  of  the  Jews 
regarding  the  Aws  and  Khazraj  was  the  reason  behind 
revealing  these  Ayat.” 

These  noble  Ayat  criticized  the  Jews  for  implementing  the 
Tawrah  sometimes  and  defying  it  at  other  times,  although  they 
believed  in  the  Tawrah  and  knew  what  they  were  doing  was 
wrong.  This  is  why  they  should  not  be  trusted  to  preserve  or 
convey  the  Tawrah.  Further,  they  should  not  be  believed  when 
it  comes  to  the  description  of  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg,  his 
coming,  his  expulsion  from  his  land,  and  his  Hijrah,  and  the 
rest  of  the  information  that  the  previous  Prophets  informed 
them  about  him,  all  of  which  they  hid.  The  Jews,  may  they 
suffer  the  curse  of  Allah,  hid  all  of  these  facts  among 
themselves,  and  this  is  why  Allah  said. 


It  Sistft  j  ^ 


iThen  what  is  the  recompense  of  those  who  do  so  among  you,  except 
disgrace  in  the  life  of  this  worlds,  because  they  defied  Allah’s  Law 
and  commandments, 


4 And  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection  they  shall  be  consigned  to  the  most 
grievous  torment}  as  punishment  for  defying  the  Book  of  Allah 


286 


TafsTr  Jfrn  Katlur 


that  they  had. 

itb%  'S  ssjts  ui 


4And  A//ali  is  not  unaware  of  what  you  do.  Those  are  they  who 
have  bought  the  life  of  this  ivorld  at  the  price  of  the  Hereafter} 
meaning,  they  prefer  this  life  to  the  Hereafter.  Therefore, 

44*531  ^ 

iTheir  torment  shall  not  be  lightened }  not  even  for  an  hour, 


iNor  shall  they  be  helped },  and  they  shall  find  no  helper  who  will 
save  them  from  the  eternal  torment  they  will  suffer,  nor  shall 
they  find  any  to  grant  them  refuge  from  it. 


p  &  mi  bi  &&  Jji  65C 

p&  p2i  *  c  5^;  ^  Ctol  fciSK 

^  AV  /vIjllil  Utjj 


4S7.  Ami  indeed,  We  gave  Musa  the  Book  and  followed  him  up 
with  a  succession  of  Messengers.  And  We  gave  'Isa,  the  son  of 
Maryam,  clear  signs  and  supported  him  with  Riih-il-Qudus .  Is 
it  that  whenever  there  came  to  you  a  Messenger  with  what  you 
yourselves  desired  not,  you  grew  arrogant?  Some  you 
disbelieved  and  some  you  killed .} 


The  Arrogance  of  the  Jews  who  denied  and  killed  Their 
Prophets 


Allah  described  the  insolence  of  Children  of  Israel,  their 
rebelliousness,  defiance  and  arrogance  towards  the  Prophets, 
following  their  lusts  and  desires.  Allah  mentioned  that  He  gave 
Musa  the  Book,  the  Tawrah,  and  that  the  Jews  changed, 
distorted,  and  defied  its  commands,  as  well  as  altered  its 
meanings. 

Allah  sent  Messengers  and  Prophets  after  Musa  who  followed 
his  law,  as  Allah  stated, 


l/ali  UM  ^  A  bjp  Ctf  'dl> 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (75  -  100 )  (Part-1 


2  87 


i Verily,  We  did  reveal  the  Tawrah  (to  Musa),  therein  was 
guidance  and  light,  by  which  the  Prophets,  who  submitted 
themselves  to  Allah's  will,  judged  for  the  Jews.  And  the  rabbis 
and  the  priests  (too  judged  for  the  Jews  by  the  Tawrah  after 
those  Prophets),  for  to  them  was  entrusted  the  protection  of 
Allah's  Book,  and  they  zoere  wihiesses  thereto}  (5:44).  This  is 
why  Allah  said  here, 

-‘M  hi  £-&j} 


iAnd  Qaffayna  him  with  Messengers}. 

As-Suddi  said  that  Abu  Malik  said  that  Qaffayna  means, 
“Succeeded”1 11  ,  while  others  said,  “Followed".  Both  meanings 
are  plausible,  since  Allah  said, 

l Zj  '}} 

iThen  We  sent  Our  Messengers  in  succession}  (23:44). 

Thereafter,  Allah  sent  the  last  Prophet  among  the  Children  of 
Israel,  Isa  the  son  of  Mary,  who  was  sent  with  some  laws  that 
differed  with  some  in  the  Tawrah.  This  is  why  Allah  also  sent 
miracles  to  support  “Isa.  These  included  bringing  the  dead 
back  to  life,  forming  the  shape  of  birds  from  clay  and  blowing 
into  them,  afterwhich  they  became  living  birds  by  Allah’s  leave, 
healing  the  sick  and  foretelling  the  Unseen,  as  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
stated.’21  Allah  also  aided  him  with  Ruh  Al-Qudus,  and  that 
refers  to  Jibril.  All  of  these  signs  testified  to  the  truthfulness  of 
‘Isa  and  what  he  was  sent  with.  Yet,  the  Children  of  Israel 
became  more  defiant  and  envious  of  him  and  did  not  want  to 
differ  with  even  one  part  of  the  Tawrah,  as  Allah  said  about 
Isa, 


iAnd  to  make  lawful  to  you  part  ofwlwt  was  forbidden  to  you, 
and  1  have  come  to  you  with  a  proof  from  your  Lord}  (3:50). 

Hence,  the  Children  of  Israel  treated  the  Prophets  in  the 
worst  manner,  rejecting  some  of  them  and  killing  some  of 
them.  All  of  this  occurred  because  the  Prophets  used  to 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :268. 
121  Ibid. 


288 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathjr 


command  the  Jews  with  what  differed  from  their  desires  and 
opinions.  The  Prophets  also  upheld  the  rulings  of  the  Tawrah 
that  the  Jews  had  changed,  and  this  is  why  it  was  difficult  for 
them  to  believe  in  these  Prophets.  Therefore,  they  rejected  the 
Prophets  and  killed  some  of  them.  Allah  said, 


sys  px  as?  *  c  5^:  pz  as\) 


il$  it  that  whenever  there  came  to  you  a  Messenger  with  what 
you  yourselves  desired  not,  you  grew  arrogant?  Some  you 
disbelieved  and  some  you  kill). 


Jibril  is  Ru.h  Al-Qudus 

The  proof  that  Jibril  is  the  Ruh  Al-Qudus  is  the  statement  of 
Ibn  Mas‘ud  in  explanation  of  this  Ayah .*l*  This  is  also  the 
view  of  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Muhammad  bin  Ka*b,  Ismail  bin  Khalid, 
As-Suddi,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas,  ‘Atiyah  Al-‘Awfi  and  Qatadah.121 
Additionally,  Allah  said, 


4 Which  the  trustworthy  Ruh  (Jibril)  has  brought  down.  Upon 
your  heart  (O  Muhammad  jg)  that  you  may  be  (one)  of  the 
wamers)  (26:193-194). 


Al-Bukhari  recorded  ‘A’ishah  saying  that  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  jig  erected  a  Minbar  in  the  Masjid  on  which  Hassan  bin 
Thabit  (the  renowned  poet)  used  to  defend  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  jg  (with  his  poems).  The  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


jA  13  j-JLiJl  Jbl  ♦  $Ul» 


«0  Allah!  Aid  Hassan  with  Riih  Al-Qudus,  for  he  defended 
Your  Prophet.^ 

Abu  Dawud  recorded  this  Hadith  in  his  Sunan'4*  as  did  At- 
Tirmidhi  who  graded  it  Hasan  Sahih.  Further,  Ibn  Hibban 
recorded  in  his  Sahih  that  Ibn  Mas*ud  said  that  the  Prophet  jg 
said, 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :269 . 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:270. 

131  Fath  Al-Bari  10:562. 

141  Abu  Dawud  5:279. 

151  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8:137. 


‘  tyjj  i-  jJ  ^ JJ  ^  £JJ  j>* 

«Jkl  ^J>  \jL+£-\j  <il  \ jijti 


uRiih  Al-Qudus  informed  me  that  no  soul  shall  die  until  it 
finishes  its  set  provisions  and  term  limit.  Therefore,  have  Taawd 
of  Allah  and  seek  your  sustenance  in  the  most  suitable  wayJl] 


The  Jews  tried  to  kill  the  Prophet 

Az-Zamakhshari  commented  on  Allah’s  statement, 

i Some  you  disbelieved  and  some  you  kill},  “Allah  did  not  say 
“killed’  here,  because  the  Jews  would  still  try  to  kill  the  Prophet 
in  the  future,  using  poison  and  magic.”  During  the  illness  that 
preceded  his  death,  the  Prophet  jg  said, 

I  jl_>l  iJqi  j~~>-  ilSI  cJlj  u# 


«/  kept  feeling  the  effect  of  what  I  ate  (from  the  poisoned  sheep) 
during  the  day  of  Khaybar,  until  nmo,  when  it  is  the  time  that 
the  aorta  ivill  be  cut  off  (meaning  when  death  is  near ).»’2’ 

This  Hadtth  was  collected  by  Al-Bukhari  and  others’3’ 


$88.  And  they  say,  "Our  hearts  are  Ghulf."  Nay,  Allah  has 
cursed  them  for  their  disbelief,  so  little  is  that  which  they 
believe.} 


Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  reported  that  Ibn  “Abbas  said  that, 

4&1  (ZJi  \)&} 

iAtid  they  say,  "Our  hearts  are  Ghulf means,  “Our  hearts  are 
screened.  Mujahid  also  said  that, 

ibii 

See  As-Sunnah  14:304. 

’21  Ibn ‘Adi  3:1239. 

’31  Path  Al-Bari  7 :737 . 

141  At-Jabari  2:326. 


290 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 

iAnd  theu  say,  " Our  hearts  are  Ghulf "},  means,  “They  are 
covered. ”ri)  Ikrimah  said,  “There  is  a  stamp  on  them.”121  Abu 
Al-‘Aliyah  said,  “They  do  not  comprehend.”131  Mujahid  and 
Qatadah  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  read  the  Ayah  in  a  way  that 
means,  “Our  hearts  contain  every  type  of  knowledge  and  do  not 
need  the  knowledge  that  you  (O  Muhammad)  have.”,4)  This  is 
the  opinion  of  ‘Ata’  and  Ibn  ‘Abbas. 

iNay,  Allah  has  cursed  them  for  their  disbelief*  meaning,  “Allah 
expelled  them  and  deprived  them  of  every  type  of 
righteousness.”  Qatadah  said  that  the  Ayah, 

iSo  little  is  that  which  they  believe .}  means,  “Only  a  few  of  them 
believe.”151  Allah’s  statement, 

ib&  ajz 


4 And  they  say,  "Our  hearts  are  Ghulf.  ">  is  similar  to  His 
statement, 

44[  VS  m  xi,  Gp 


4And  they  say:  "Our  hearts  are  under  coverings  (screened) 
from  that  to  which  you  invite  us}  (41:5). 

This  is  why  Allah  said  here, 


4'oPZ  U  ^ 


4Nay,  Allah  has  cursed  them  for  their  disbelief,  so  little  is  that 
which  they  believe .} 


meaning,  “It  is  not  as  they  claim.  Rather,  their  hearts  are 
cursed  and  stamped,”  just  as  Allah  said  in  Surat  An-Nisa’ 
(4:155), 


111  Ibid. 

121  Ibn  AbiHatim  1  :274. 
131  Ibn  Abi  H&tim  1 :  273. 
141  Al-Qurtubi . 

151  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :274. 


291 


Surah  Z .  A hBagarah  (13.  -  1QQ).  (Parti} 

iAnd  of  their  saying:  " Our  hearts  are  wrapped  (with 
coverings,  i.e.  we  do  not  understand  what  the  Messengers 
say)"  -  nay,  Allah  has  set  a  seal  upon  their  hearts  because  of 
their  disbelief,  so  they  believe  not  but  a  little.} 

There  is  a  difference  of  opinion  regarding  the  meaning  of 
Allah’s  statement, 

4  So  little  is  that  which  they  believe.}  and  His  statement, 

yi} 

4  So  they  believe  not  except  a  few}.  Some  scholars  said  that  the 
Ayat  indicate  that  a  few  of  them  would  believe,  or  that  their 
faith  is  minute,  because  they  believe  in  Resurrection  and  in 
Allah’s  reward  and  punishment  that  Musa  foretold.  Yet,  this 
faith  will  not  benefit  them  since  it  is  overshadowed  by  their 
disbelief  in  what  Muhammad  brought  them.  Some  scholars 
said  that  the  Jews  did  not  actually  believe  in  anything  and  that 
Allah  said, 


4 So  little  is  that  which  they  believe},  meaning,  they  do  not  believe. 
This  meaning  is  similar  to  the  Arabic  expression,  “Hardly  have  I 
seen  anything  like  this,”  meaning,  “I  have  never  seen  anything 
like  this.” 


Jc*  o'rv-i  Jj  j*  !y' 0  m  <-•  —  ^  r — r 


i89.  And  when  there  came  to  them  (the  Jeios),  a  Book  (this 
Qur'an)  from  Allah  confirming  what  is  with  than  (the  Tawrdh) 
and  the  Injil  (Gospel),  although  aforetime  they  had  invoked 
Allah  (for  the  coming  of  Muhammad  jfc-J  in  order  to  gain 
victory  over  those  who  disbelieved,  that  when  there  came  to 
them  that  which  they  had  recognised,  they  disbelieved  in  it.  So 
let  the  curse  of  Allah  be  on  the  disbelievers.} 


The  Jews  were  awaiting  the  Prophet's  coming,  but  They 
disbelieved  in  Him  when  He  was  sent 

Allah  said, 


292 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


4  And  when  there  came 
to  them >  meaning,  the 
Jews, 

4i»'  x*  ji 

4a  Book  from  Allah ^ 
meaning,  the  Qur’an 
that  Allah  sent  down 
to  Muhammad, 

i Ui 

iconfirming  what  is 
with  them ^  meaning, 
the  Tawrah.  Further, 
Allah  said, 

4\j$r  bM 

4al  though  aforetime  they 
had  invoked  Allah  (for 
coming  of  Muhammad 
5fe)  in  order  to  gain 
victory  over  those  who 
disbelieved ^  meaning,  before  this  Messenger  came  to  them,  they 
used  to  ask  Allah  to  aid  them  by  his  arrival,  against  their 
polytheistic  enemies  in  war.  They  used  to  say  to  the  polytheists, 
“A  Prophet  shall  be  sent  just  before  the  end  of  this  world  and 
we,  along  with  him,  shall  exterminate  you,  just  as  the  nations 
of  ‘Ad  and  Iram  were  exterminated.”  Also,  Muhammad  bin 
Ishaq  narrated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “The  Jews  used  to  invoke 
Allah  (for  the  coming  of  Muhammad  $Kg)  in  order  to  gain  victory 
over  the  Aws  and  Khazraj,  before  the  Prophet  $£5  was  sent. 
When  Allah  sent  him  to  the  Arabs,  they  rejected  him  and 
denied  what  they  used  to  say  about  him.  Hence,  Mu'adh  bin 
Jabal  and  Bishr  bin  Al-Bara’  bin  Ma'rur,  from  Bani  Sal  am  ah, 
said  to  them,  ‘O  Jews!  Fear  Allah  and  embrace  Islam.  You  used 
to  invoke  Allah  for  the  coming  of  Muhammad  when  we  were 
still  disbelievers  and  you  used  to  tell  us  that  he  would  come 


293 


Surah  2.  Al-Bagarah  (75  -  100)  (Part-1) 


and  describe  him  to  us,’  Salam  bin  Mushkim  from  Bani  An- 
Nadir  replied,  ‘He  did  not  bring  anything  that  we  recognize.  He 
is  not  the  Prophet  we  told  you  about.’  Allah  then  revealed  this 
Ayah  about  their  statement, 

q  $  xe  Ik  a# 


}And  when  there  came  to  them  (the  Jews),  a  Book  (this  Qur'an) 
from  Allah  confirtning  wlmt  is  with  them  (the  Tawrdh)  and  the 
InjH  (Gospel)}”*" 

Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  said,  “The  Jews  used  to  ask  Allah  to  send 
Muhammad  jg  so  that  they  would  gain  victory  over  the  Arab 
disbelievers.  They  used  to  say,  ‘O  Allah!  Send  the  Prophet  that 
we  read  about  -  in  the  Tawrah  -  so  that  we  can  torment  and 
kill  the  disbelievers  alongside  him.’  When  Allah  sent 
Muhammad  jg  and  they  saw  that  he  was  not  one  of  them,  they 
rejected  him  and  envied  the  Arabs,  even  though  they  knew  that 
he  was  the  Messenger  of  Allah.  Hence,  Allah  said, 


•..Z'if 


iThen  when  there  came  to  them  that  which  they  had 
recognized,  they  disbelieved  in  it.  So  let  the  curse  of  Allah  be 
on  the  disbelievers}. ”*2' 


o;  ’if  o'  ££  if  &  fc*  o'  p  «■  J»'  iiXif 

JL&e  jj&Xi  yXu  j’.tj  j.  itti 


$90.  Hoiv  bad  is  that  for  which  they  have  sold  their  own  selves, 
that  they  should  disbelieve  in  that  which  Allah  has  revealed  (the 
Qur'an),  grudging  that  Allah  should  reveal  of  His  grace  unto 
whom  He  wills  of  His  servants.  So  they  have  drawn  on 
themselves  wrath  upon  wrath.  And  for  the  disbelievers,  there  is 
disgracing  torment.} 


Mujahid  said. 


iHcno  bad  is  that  for  which  they  have  sold  their  own  selves},  “The 

111  At-Tabari  2  :333 . 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :  276. 


294 _  Tafsir  Ibn  Kathtr 

Jews  sold  the  truth  for  falsehood  and  hid  the  truth  about 
Muhammad  sg.”11’  As-Suddi  said  that  the  Ayah, 

4(i*  >  ^ 

iHow  bad  is  that  for  which  they  have  sold  their  oivit  selves}  means, 
“The  Jews  sold  themselves.”*  *  meaning,  what  is  worse  is  what 
they  chose  for  themselves  by  disbelieving  in  what  Allah  revealed 
to  Muhammad  sg  instead  of  believing,  aiding  and  supporting 
him.  This  behavior  of  theirs  is  the  result  of  their  injustice,  envy 
and  hatred, 


igrudging  that  Allah  should  reveal  of  His  grace  unto  whom  He  ivills 
of  His  servants}.”  There  is  no  envy  worse  than  this.  Therefore, 


y.Lj} 


4So  they  have  drawn  on  themselves  wrath  upon  wrath}.  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
commented  on  this  Ayah,  “Allah  became  angry  with  them 
because  they  ignored  some  of  the  Tawrah  and  disbelieved  in  the 
Prophet  that  He  sent  to  them.”131  I  (Ibn  Kathlr)  say  that  the 
meaning  of, 


4' 


4And  they  drew  on  themselves}  is  that  they  deserved  and 
acquired  multiplied  anger.  Also,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  said,  “Allah 
became  angry  with  them,  because  of  their  disbelief  in  the  Injil 
and  Isa  and  He  became  angry  with  them  again,  because  they 
disbelieved  in  Muhammad  jg  and  the  Qur’an.”14’  Similar  was 
said  by  Ikrimah  and  Qatadah.’5’  Allah  said, 

4-l*r  4#  Uj&&} 

iAtid  for  the  disbelievers,  there  is  disgracing  torment}.  Since  their 
disbelief  was  a  result  of  their  transgression  and  envy,  which 
was  caused  by  arrogance,  they  were  punished  with  disgrace 

111  At-Jabari  2:340. 

,2’  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :277 . 

*3’  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :279 . 

141  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :278 . 

151  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :279 . 


and  humiliation  in  this  world  and  the  Hereafter.  Similarly, 
Allah  said, 


iVerily,  those  who  scorn  My  worship  (i.e.  do  not  invoke  Me,  and  do 
not  believe  in  My  Oneness)  they  will  surely  enter  Hell  in 
humiliation /">  (40:60)  meaning,  “Disgraced,  degraded  and 

humiliated.”  Imam  Ahmad  narrated  that  ‘Amr  bin  Shu'ayb  said 
that  his  father  said  that  his  grandfather  said  that  the  Prophet 
35  said, 


ja  jCS/l  jU  Jlii  p-G?  ijt 

fljtljl  Jif  ;3L ip 


«77ic  arrogant  people  will  be  gathered  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection  in  the  size  of  ants,  but  in  the  shape  of  men. 
Everything  shall  be  above  them,  because  of  the  humiliation 
placed  on  them,  until  they  alter  a  prison  in  Jahatinam  called 
‘Baivlas’  where  the  fire  will  surround  them  from  above.  They 
shall  drink  from  the  puss  of  the  people  of  the  Fire.®1 11 


fkj  pi \jj  Uj  U.’jfr  jyi  Ej  IjPJ  ijllS  ill  jp  t*j  j-j 

tj*  oi  S$  Lri  pi  ji  Q  Uxii  jij' 


493.  And  when  it  is  said  to  them  (the  Jews),  " Believe  in  xohat 
Allah  has  sent  down,"  they  say,  "We  believe  in  what  was  sent 
down  to  us."  And  they  disbelieve  in  that  which  came  after  it, 
while  it  is  the  truth  confirming  what  is  with  than.  Say  (O 
Muhammad  %  to  them):  " Why  then  have  you  killed  the 
Prophets  of  Allah  aforetime,  if  you  indeed  have  been 
believers? 

492.  And  indeed  Musa  came  to  you  with  clear  proofs,  yet  you 
worshipped  the  calf  after  he  left,  and  you  were  Zalimun.) 


I1*  Ahmad  2 :179. 


^ - - -  Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 

Although  The  Jews  denied  the  Truth,  They  claimed  to 
be  Believers! 

Allah  said, 


iAnd  when  it  is  said  to  them),  meaning,  the  Jews  and  the  People 
of  the  Book, 

i’ utf  'Sj\  LLj 

4 Believe  in  what  Allah  has  sent  down)  to  Muhammad  jg,  believe 
in  and  follow  him, 

its  &  i L  tify 

iThey  say,  “We  believe  in  what  was  sent  down  to  us.")  meaning,  it 
is  enough  for  us  to  believe  in  what  was  revealed  to  us  in  the 
Tawrah  and  the  Injll,  and  this  is  the  path  that  we  choose, 


iAnd  they  disbelieve  in  that  which  came  after  it). 
i'S*  jiii  y>j) 


iwhile  it  is  the  truth  confirming  what  is  with  titan)  meaning,  while 
knowing  that  what  was  revealed  to  Muhammad  jg, 


iit  is  the  truth  confirming  what  is  with  them).  This  means  that 
since  what  was  sent  to  Muhammad  gg  conforms  to  what  was 
revealed  to  the  People  of  the  Book,  then  this  fact  constitutes  a 
proof  against  them.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


iThose  to  whom  We  gave  the  Scripture  (Jews  and  Christians) 
recognize  him  (Muhammad  sg)  as  they  recognize  their  sons) 
(2:146).  Allah  said  next, 


0)  J-A  Lit  $  tClit  ojiii 

i“Why  then  have  you  killed  the  Prophets  of  Allah  aforetime,  if 
you  indeed  have  been  believers?”). 

This  means,  “If  your  claim  that  you  believe  in  what  was 


297 


Small  2.  AlzBacjgrgh  (75  -  100 )  (Parti} 


revealed  to  you  is  true,  then  why  did  you  kill  the  Prophets 
who  came  to  you  affirming  the  Tawrah’s  Law,  although  you 
knew  they  were  true  Prophets?  You  killed  them  simply  out  of 
transgression,  stubbornness  and  injustice  with  Allah’s 
Messengers.  Therefore,  you  only  follow  your  lusts,  opinions 
and  desires.”  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


4^2  j&St  a &  *  q  3ji£  ^  tibfy 


4/s  it  that  whenever  there  came  to  you  a  Messenger  with  what 
you  yourselves  desired  not,  you  gmv  arrogant?  Some  you 
disbelieved  and  some  you  killed.  } 

Also,  As-Suddi  said,  “In  this  Ayah,  Allah  chastised  the 
People  of  the  Book, 


it  Z# 


iSay  (O  Muhammad  to  them):  "Why  then  have  you  killed 
the  Prophets  of  Allah  aforetime,  if  you  indeed  have  been 
believers?"}.”^' 


4-r~^>  fry 

iAnd  indeed  Miisd  came  to  you  with  clear  proofs ^  meaning,  with 
clear  signs  and  clear  proofs  that  he  was  the  Messenger  of  Allah 
and  that  there  is  no  deity  worthy  of  worship  except  Allah.  The 
clear  signs  -or  miracles-  mentioned  here  are  the  flood,  the 
locusts,  the  lice,  the  frogs,  the  blood,  the  staff  and  the  hand. 
Musa’s  miracles  also  include  parting  the  sea,  shading  the  Jews 
with  clouds,  the  manna  and  quails,  the  gushing  stone,  etc. 

4J^j)'  } rSjC\ 

iyet  you  worshipped  the  calf}  meaning,  as  a  deity  instead  of 
Allah,  during  the  time  of  Musa.  Allah’s  statement, 

4-*^  Si} 

Rafter  he  left}  after  Musa  went  to  Mount  Tur  to  speak  to  Allah. 
Similarly,  Allah  said, 


iAnd  the  people  of  Musa  made  in  his  absence,  out  of  their 

m 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :281 . 


298 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlur 

ornaments,  the  image  of  a  calf  (for  worship).  It  had  a  sound  (as 
if  it  was  mooing))  (7:148). 


iand  you  were  Zdlimun)  meaning,  you  were  unjust  in  this 
behavior  of  worshipping  the  calf,  although  you  knew  that  there 
is  no  deity  worthy  of  worship  except  Allah.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


U  13. 


&L  u> 


iAnd  when  they  regretted  and  saw  that  the y  had  gone  astray, 
they  (repented  and)  said:  "If  our  Lord  lurve  twt  mercy  upon  us 
and  forgive  us,  we  shall  certainly  be  of  the  losers ")  (7:149). 


tjUJi  ffu  fc  ijii  jjii  piL.  i>j» 

I*  y*=3$u  I  J— jfcji  ( Z-gjLi  4  *_£>— tlij* 


493.  And  (remember)  when  We  took  your  covenant  and  We 
raised  above  you  the  Mount  (saying) ,  "Hold  finnly  to  what  We 
have  given  you  and  hear  (Our  Word).”  They  said,  "We  have 
heard  and  disobeyed.”  And  their  hearts  absorbed  (the  worship 
of)  the  calf  because  of  their  disbelief.  Say :  " Worst  indeed  is  that 
which  your  faith  enjoins  on  you  if  you  are  believers") 


The  Jews  rebel  after  Allah  took  Their  Covenant  and 
raised  the  Mountain  above  Their  Heads 

Allah  reminded  the  Jews  of  their  errors,  breaking  His 
covenant,  transgression  and  defiance,  when  He  raised  Mount 
Tur  above  them  so  that  they  would  believe  and  agree  to  the 
terms  of  the  covenant.  Yet,  they  broke  it  soon  afterwards, 

iThey  said,  "We  have  heard  and  disobeyed.”)  We  have  mentioned 
the  Tafsir  of  this  subject  before.  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  said  that 
Ma‘mar  narrated  that  Qatadah  said  that, 

J — p-vA*  4 

iAtid  their  hearts  absorbed  (the  worship  of)  the  calf)  means,  “They 


299 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (75  -  100)  (Part-1) 

absorbed  its  love,  until  its  love  resided  in  their  hearts.”111  This 
is  also  the  opinion  of  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  and  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas.121 
Allah’s  statement, 


■4 


iSay:  "Worst  indeed  is  that  which  your  faith  enjoins  on  you  if  you 
are  believers.”)  means,  “Worse  yet  is  the  manner  in  which  you 
behaved  in  the  past  and  even  now,  disbelieving  in  Allah’s  Ayat 
and  defying  the  Prophets.  You  also  disbelieved  in  Muhammad 
m,  which  is  the  worst  of  your  deeds  and  the  harshest  sin  that 
you  committed.  You  disbelieved  in  the  Final  Messenger  and  the 
master  of  all  Prophets  and  Messengers,  the  one  who  was  sent 
to  all  mankind.  How  can  you  then  claim  that  you  believe,  while 
committing  the  evil  of  breaking  Allah’s  covenant,  disbelieving  in 
Allah’s  Ayat  and  worshipping  the  calf  instead  of  Allah?" 


ft  i itj  irj  ^  ^  Js 

c;  ^  ■)  %  \&\  *t$\  yjf.  ojilit 


5J 


Cri 


494.  Say  to  (than)  :  "If  the  abode  of  the  Hereafter  with  Allah  is 
indeed  for  you  especially  and  not  for  others  of  mankind,  then 
long  for  death  if  you  are  truthful") 

495.  But  they  will  never  long  for  it  because  of  what  their  hands 
have  salt  before  them  (i.e.  what  they  have  done).  And  Allah  is 
Aware  of  the  Zdlimin  .) 

496.  And  verily,  you  will  find  them  (the  jews)  the  greediest  of 
mankind  for  life  and  (evai  greedier)  than  those  who  ascribe 
partners  to  Allah .  One  of  than  toishes  that  he  could  be  given  a 
life  of  a  thousand  years.  But  the  grant  of  such  life  will  not  save 
him  even  a  little  from  (due)  punishment.  And  Allah  is  Seer  of 
what  they  do.) 


111  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  1 :52. 
121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :283 . 


300 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlur 

Calling  the  Jews  to 
invoke  Allah  to 
destroy  the  Uqjust 
Party 

Muhammad  bin 
Ishaq  narrated  that 
Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 
“Allah  said  to  His 
Prophet  jg, 

Jiiif  ££  ji)> 

jji  oj  'iCjU  <L'  ip 

.f  1 

4Say  to  (than) :  "If  the 
home  of  the  Hereafter 
with  Allah  is  indeed  far 
you  especially  and  not 
far  otlters,  of  mankind, 
then  long  far  death  if 
you  are  truthful."} 
meaning,  ‘Invoke 
Allah  to  bring  death 
to  the  lying  camp 
among  the  two  (Muslims  and  Jews).’  The  Jews  declined  this 
offer  by  the  Messenger  of  Allah  sfa.”1'1 

££  &s  n-J  ^  j'fa 

4But  they  will  never  long  for  it  because  of  what  their  hands 
have  sent  before  than  (i.c.  what  thaj  have  done).  And  Allah  is 
Aware  of  the  Zdlimtn  (polytheists  and  wrongdoers).} 

meaning,  “Since  they  know  that  they  recognize  you,  and  yet 
disbelieve  in  you.”  Had  they  wished  death  that  day,  no  Jew 
would  have  remained  alive  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  Moreover, 
Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that, 


i  oj  j 


$'?  \  *  •  ;  'C  " 
*  \ 


1— j'  jj«l  I 


<>• 


Judj  {^|  j 

0  JLJl 

ait  J ^  ft 


[1] 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :284. 


301 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (75  -  100)  (Parti} 


4op't  ij-3^ 

4T?i£/i  long  for  death},  means,  “Invoke  (Allah)  for  death.”*11  Also, 
‘Abdur-Razzaq  narrated  that  ‘Ikrimah  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
commented, 


iThen  long  far  death  if  you  are  truthful},  “Had  the  Jews  invoked 
Allah  for  death,  they  would  have  perished.”*21  Also,  Ibn  Abi 
Hatim  recorded  Said  bin  Jubayr  saying  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 
“Had  the  Jews  asked  for  death,  one  of  them  would  have  choked 
on  his  own  saliva.”*3*  These  statements  have  authentic  chains 
of  narration  up  to  Ibn  ‘Abbas.  Further,  Ibn  Jarir  said  in  his 
Tafsir,  “We  were  told  that  the  Prophet  jg  said, 


jjjJl  IjJLJ  oj^Jt  \j^j  jl 

Wu  ijijj  v  i sg  4ii 


‘Had  the  Jews  wished  for  death,,  they  would  have  died  and  seen 
their  seats  in  the  Fire.  And,  those  who  invoked  such  curse 
against  Allah's  Messenger  would  have  found  no  families  or 
property  had  they  returned  to  their  /iomes».”*4* 

Similar  to  this  Ayah  is  Allah’s  statement  in  Surat  Al- 
Jumu'ah, 


4(Say  (O  Muhammad  :  "O  you  Jews!  If  you  pretend  that 
you  are  friends  of  Allah,  to  the  exclusion  of  (all)  other  mankind, 
then  long  for  death  if  you  are  truthful  ."But  they  will  never 
long  for  it  (death),  because,  of  what  (deeds)  their  hands  have 
sent  before  them!  And  Allah  kticnvs  well  the  Zdlimin.  Say  (to 


111  At-Tabari  2:366. 

*2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :285 . 
131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :284 . 
*4*  At-Tabari  2 :362 . 


302 


Tafsjr  Ibn  Kathir 


them) :  "Verily,  the  death  from  which  you  flee  will  surely  meet 
you,  then  you  ivill  be  sent  back  to  (Allah)  the  Knoiver  of  the 
unseen  and  the  seen,  and  He  will  tell  you  what  you  used  to 
do.")  (62:6-8). 

So  they  claimed  that  they  are  Allah’s  sons  and  loved  ones 
and  said,  “Only  those  who  are  Christian  or  Jews  shall  enter 
Paradise.”  Therefore,  they  were  called  to  invoke  Allah  to 
destroy  the  lying  group,  be  it  them  or  the  Muslims.  When  the 
Jews  declined,  every  one  was  sure  of  their  wrong,  for  had  they 
been  sure  of  their  claims,  then  they  would  have  accepted  the 
proposal.  Their  lies  were  thus  exposed  after  they  declined  the 
offer  to  invoke  the  curse. 

Similarly,  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  called  a  delegation  of 
Najran’s  Christians  to  curse  after  he  refuted  them  in  a  debate 
in  which  they  demonstrated  stubbornness  and  defiance.  Allah 
said. 


Csvjll  'jitw  yb  J&r  U  JlIl) 

£  jl  Sp  ii 


iThen  whoever  disputes  with  you  concerning  him  ('Isa)  after 
(all  this)  kttcnoledge  that  has  come  to  you  (i.e.  isa)  being  a 
servant  of  Allah,  and  having  no  share  in  divinity),  say  (O 
Muhamnuid  jg) :  "Come,  let  us  call  our  sons  and  your  sons, 
our  women  and  your  women,  ourselves  and  yourselves  -  then 
we  pray  and  invoke  (sincerely)  the  curse  of  Allah  upon  those 
who  lie.")  (3:61). 


When  the  Christians  heard  this  challenge,  some  of  them  said 
to  each  other,  “By  Allah!  If  you  do  such  with  this  Prophet, 
none  of  you  will  have  an  eye  that  blinks.”  This  is  when  they 
resorted  to  peace  and  gave  the  Jizyah  (tax)  in  disgrace.  The 
Prophet  jg  accepted  the  Jizyah  from  them  and  sent  Abu 
‘Ubaydah  bin  Al-Jarrah  with  them  as  a  trustee.  Similar  to  this 
meaning  is  Allah’s  command  to  His  Prophet  to  proclaim  to 
the  polytheists: 


4  &  jiiiu  ja-Lai  ci  if 


iSay  (O  Muhammad  jg)  whoever  is  in  error,  the  Most 
Gracious  (Allah)  zoill  prolong  him  (in  it).)  (19:75) 

meaning,  “Whoever  among  us  has  deviated,  may  Allah  increase 


303 


Surah  2.  ALBamrah  <75  -  1M  rPnrM) 

and  prolong  his  deviation.”  We  will  mention  this  subject  later, 
Allah  willing. 

The  Mubahalah  (invocation  to  Allah  to  destroy  the  liars)  was 
called  a  ‘wish’  here,  because  every  just  person  wishes  that 
Allah  destroy  the  unjust  opponent  who  is  debating  with  him, 
especially  when  the  just  person  has  a  clear,  apparent  proof  for 
the  truth  he  is  calling  to.  Also,  the  Mubahalah  involves 
invoking  Allah  for  death  of  the  unjust  group,  because  to 
disbelievers,  life  is  the  biggest  prize,  especially  when  they  know 
the  evil  destination  they  will  meet  after  death. 


Disbelievers  wish  They  could  live  longer 

This  is  why  Allah  said  next, 

i}j^- 


iBut  they  will  never  long  for  it  because  of  wluit  their  hands 
have  sent  before  them  (i.e.what  they  have  done).  And  Allah  is 
Aware  of  the  Zdlimin.  And  verily,  you  will  find  them  (the 
Jews)  the  greediest  of  mankind  for  life 

meaning,  greedy  to  live  longer,  because  they  know  their  evil 
end,  and  the  only  reward  they  will  have  with  Allah  is  total 
loss.  This  life  is  a  prison  for  the  believer  and  Paradise  for  the 
disbeliever.  Therefore,  the  People  of  the  Book  wish  they  could 
delay  the  Hereafter,  as  much  as  possible.  However,  they  shall 
certainly  meet  what  they  are  trying  to  avoid,  even  if  they  are 
more  eager  to  delay  the  Hereafter  than  the  polytheists  who  do 
not  have  a  divine  book. 

Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  narrated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented  on, 

iBut  the  grant  of  such  life  will  not  save  him  even  a  little  from 
(due)  punishment .  ^ 

“Long  life  shall  not  save  them  from  torment.  Certainly,  the 
polytheists  do  not  believe  in  resurrection  after  death,  and  they 
would  love  to  enjoy  a  long  life.  The  Jews  know  the  humiliation 
they  will  suffer  in  the  Hereafter  for  knowingly  ignoring  the 
truth.”'1*  Also,  ‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Zayd  bin  Aslam  said,  “The 


111  Ibn  AbiHatim  1:288. 


304 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Jews  are  most  eager  for  this  life.  They  wish  they  could  live  for 
a  thousand  years.  However,  living  for  a  thousand  years  will 
not  save  them  from  torment,  just  as  Iblis’  -  Satan  -  long  life 
did  not  benefit  him,  due  to  being  a  disbeliever.”1*1 


4And  Allah  is  Seer  ofiohat  they  do.}  meaning,  “Allah  knows  what 
His  servants  are  doing,  whether  good  or  evil,  and  will 
compensate  each  of  them  accordingly.” 


t*A  Mxd  j jLj  tilij  jjy 

•*J==<4*)  &  15  jXrA'j 


497.  Say  (O  Muhammad  jg) :  "Whoever  is  an  enemy  to  fibril 
(Gabriel)  (let  him  die  in  his  fury),  for  indeed  he  has  brought  it 
(this  Qur'an)  down  to  your  heart  by  Allah's  permission, 
confirming  lohat  came  before  it  (i.e.  the  Tawrdh  and  the  Injil) 
and  guidance  and  glad  tidings  for  the  believers }. 

498.  "Whoever  is  an  enemy  to  Allah,  His  Angels,  His 
Messengers,  fibril  and  Mika’il,  then  verily,  Allah  is  an  enemy 
to  the  disbelievers ."} 


The  Jews  are  the  Enemies  of  Jibril 

Imam  Abu  Ja*far  bin  Jarir  At-Tabari  said,  “The  scholars  of 
Tafsir  agree  that  this  Ayah  (2:  97-98)  was  revealed  in  response 
to  the  Jews  who  claimed  that  Jibril  (Gabriel)  is  an  enemy  of 
the  Jews  and  that  Mikall  (Michael)  is  their  friend.”^21  Al- 
Bukhari  said,  “Allah  said, 

cs} 

4Whoever  is  an  enemy  of  fibril  (let  him  die  in  his  firry)}.  ‘Ikrimah 
said,  “Jibr,  Mik  and  Israf  all  mean,  worshipper,  while  11  means, 
Allah”.  Anas  bin  Malik  said,  “When  ‘Abdullah  bin  Salam  heard 
of  the  arrival  of  the  Prophet  jg  in  Al-Madlnah,  he  was  working 
on  his  land.  He  came  to  the  Prophet  jg  and  said,  1  am  going  to 
ask  you  about  three  things  which  nobody  knows  except  a 


111  At-Tabari  2:376. 
121  At-Tabari  2:377. 


305 


Surah  2.  At-Baqarah  (75  -  100 )  (Part-1) 

Prophet.  What  will  be  the  first  portent  of  the  Hour?  What  will 
be  the  first  meal  taken  by  the  people  of  Paradise?  Why  does  a 
child  resemble  its  father,  and  why  does  it  resemble  its  maternal 
uncle?’  Allah’s  Messenger  jfe  said,  *  fibril  has  just  told  me  the 
answers . “  ‘Abdullah  said,  Tie  (i.e.  Jibril),  among  all  the  angels,  is 
the  enemy  of  the  Jews.’  Allah’s  Messenger  0,  recited  the  Ayah, 

iiji  (ufy  JhL/wJ  'Jj* 

^Whoever  is  an  enemy  to  Jibril  (Gabriel)  (let  him  die  in  his 
fury),  for  indeed  he  has  brought  it  (this  Qur'an)  down  to  your 
heart}. 

Allah’s  Messenger  then  said,  11  The  first  portent  of  the  Hour  will 
be  a  fire  that  will  bring  together  the  people  from  the  east  to  the  west; 
the  first  meal  of  the  people  of  Paradise  will  be  the  caudate  lobe  of  the 
liver  of  fish.  As  for  the  child  resembling  his  parents:  If  a  man  has 
sexual  intercourse  ivith  his  wife  and  his  discharge  is  first,  the  child 
will  resemble  the  father.  If  the  woman  has  a  discharge  first,  the  child 
ivill  resemble  her  side  of  the  family .»  On  that  ‘Abdullah  bin  Salam 
said,  1  testify  that  there  is  no  deity  worthy  of  worship  except 
Allah  and  you  are  the  Messenger  of  Allah.’  ‘Abdullah  bin  Salam 
further  said,  ‘O  Allah’s  Messenger!  The  Jews  are  liars,  and  if 
they  should  come  to  know  about  my  conversion  to  Islam  before 
you  ask  them  (about  me),  they  will  tell  a  lie  about  me.’  The 
Jews  came  to  Allah’s  Messenger  0„  and  ‘Abdullah  went  inside 
the  house.  Allah’s  Messenger  0  asked  (the  Jews),  « 'What  kind  of 
man  is  'Abdullah  bin  Salam?' »  They  replied,  ‘He  is  the  best  among 
us,  the  son  of  the  best  among  us,  our  master  and  the  son  of 
our  master.’  Allah’s  Messenger  0,  said,  '‘What  do  you  think  if  he 
ivould  embrace  Islam?*  The  Jews  said,  ‘May  Allah  save  him  from 
it.’  Then  ‘Abdullah  bin  Salam  came  out  in  front  of  them  saying, 
‘I  testify  that  none  has  the  right  to  be  worshipped  but  Allah  and 
that  Muhammad  is  the  Messenger  of  Allah.’  Thereupon  they 
said,  “He  is  the  evilest  among  us,  and  the  son  of  the  evilest 
among  us.’  And  they  continued  talking  badly  about  him.  Ibn 
Salam  said,  This  is  what  I  feared,  O  Messenger  of  Allah!.’”  Only 
Al-Bukhari  recorded  this  Hadith  with  this  chain  of  narration.*1* 
Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim  recorded  this  Hadith  from  Anas  using 


1,1  FathAl-Bari  8:15  &  7:319. 


306 


Tafslr  Ibtt  Katlur 


another  chain  of  narration  J 1  ' 

Some  people  say  that  ‘U‘  means  worshipper  while  whatever 
word  that  is  added  to  it  becomes  Allah’s  Name,  because  'll’  is 
a  constant  in  such  conjunction.  This  is  similar  to  the  names 
‘Abdullah,  ‘Abdur-Rahman,  ‘Abdul-Malik,  ‘Abdul-Quddus, 
‘Abdus-Salam,  ‘Abdul-Kafi,  ‘Abdul-Jalil,  and  so  forth.  Hence, 
‘Abd’  is  constant  in  these  compound  names,  while  the 
remainder  differs  from  name  to  name.  This  is  the  same  case 
with  Jibril,  Mika  11,  ‘Azrall,  Israfil,  and  so  forth.  Allah  knows 
best. 


Choosing  Some  Angels  to  believe  in  over  Others  is 
Disbelief  like  choosing  Some  Prophets  over  Others 

Allah  said. 


JU»  Jc  . Aj  'Jj* 


i Whoever  is  an  enemy  to  fibril  (Gabriel)  (jet  him  die  in  his 
fury),  far  indeed  he  has  brought  it  (this  Qur’an)  down  to  your 
heart  by  Allah's  permission,} 

meaning,  whoever  becomes  an  enemy  of  Jibril,  let  him  know 
that  he  is  Ru.h  Al-Qudus  who  brought  down  the  Glorious  Dhikr 
(Qur’an)  to  your  heart  from  Allah  by  His  leave.  Hence,  he  is  a 
messenger  from  Allah.  Whoever  takes  a  messenger  as  an 
enemy,  will  have  taken  all  the  messengers  as  enemies. 
Further,  whoever  believes  in  one  messenger,  is  required  to 
believe  in  all  of  the  messengers.  Whoever  rejects  one 
messenger,  he  has  rejected  all  of  the  messengers.  Similarly, 
Allah  said, 


^  •*  X  4  ■t'V  .>V  A  >/  *  *  f  /  ^  \ 


iVerily,  those  who  disbelieve  in  Allah  and  His  Messengers  and 
wish  to  make  distinction  between  Allah  and  His  Messengers  (by 
believing  in  Allah  and  disbelieving  in  His  Messengers)  saying, 
"We  believe  in  some  but  reject  others.”}  (4:150) 

Allah  decreed  that  they  are  disbelievers,  because  they 
believe  in  some  Prophets  and  reject  others.  This  is  the  same 


m 


Sabah  Al-Bukhari  3329,  3911, 3938,  and  Muslim  315. 


307 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (75  -  100)  fParM) 

with  those  who  take  Jibril  as  an  enemy,  because  Jibrll  did  not 
choose  missions  on  his  own,  but  by  the  command  of  his  Lord, 

vi  J &  Cf} 

}And  we  (angels)  descend  not  except  by  the  command  of  your 
Lord }  (19:64),  and, 


^ j— «iU»  Jf-  .|y.ij>*VI  of  to  vy 


iAnd  truly,  this  (the  Qur'an)  is  a  revelation  from  the  Lord  of 
all  that  exists.  Which  the  trustworthy  Riih  (Jibril)  has  brought 
dozvti.  Upon  your  heart  (O  Muhammad  jfej  that  you  may  be 
(one)  of  the  zoamers }  (26:192-194). 

Al-Bukhari  reported  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  said, 


« Allah  said,  'Whoever  takes  a  friend  of  Mine  as  an  enemy,  will 
have  started  a  war  with 


Therefore,  Allah  became  angry  with  those  who  took  Jibril  as 
an  enemy.  Allah  said, 


4  to)\  uib  viiii  Je-  Jjji  /dU  'jji 


4 Whoever  is  an  enemy  to  Jibril  (Gabriel)  (let  him  die  in  his 
fury),  for  indeed  he  has  brought  it  (this  Qur'an)  down  to  your 
heart  by  Allah’s  permission,  confirming  what  came  before  it} 
meaning,  the  previous  Books, 


iand  guidance  and  glad  tidings  for  the  believers}  meaning,  as 
guidance  to  their  hearts  and  bringer  of  the  good  news  of 
Paradise,  which  is  exclusively  for  the  believers.  Similarly,  Allah 
said, 

• _ (to*  i£*1*  djjyli 

}Say:  "It  is  for  those  who  believe,  a  guide  and  a  healing.”} 
(41:44),  and, 


111  Fath  Al-Bari  1 1 :348 . 


309 


Sutvh  2.  Al-Baqarah  (101  -  124)  (Portal} 

and  earth  and  Kncnver  of  the  seen  and  the  unseen!  You  judge 
between  Your  servants  regarding  what  they  differ  in,  so  direct  me  to 
the  truth  which  they  differ  on,  by  Your  leave.  Verily,  You  guide 
whom  You  will  to  the  straight  path.^ 

Allah’s  statement, 

4(^j}Q  3^  &$) 

4 then  verily,  Allah  is  an  enemy  to  the  disbelievers)  informed  the 
disbelievers  that  whoever  takes  a  friend  of  Allah  as  an  enemy, 
then  he  has  taken  Allah  as  an  enemy,  and  whoever  treats  Allah 
as  an  enemy,  then  he  shall  be  Allah’s  enemy.  Indeed,  whoever 
is  an  enemy  of  Allah  then  he  will  lose  in  this  life  and  the 
Hereafter,  as  stated  earlier; 

JU3  llJ J  ^ Lp  3 

^Whoever  takes  a  friend  of  Mine  as  an  enemy,  I  shall  wage  war 
on  /iim.»|21 


ul Vj  liU^  xoij) 

U  ^  ji  'J  j;  ^44  A/  «S£ 

(*4^  c/jji  Si  ,Jyj»  jji  P  tlj 

&5j  uj  £  4Ldii  yg?  c  ijdt; 

lij  jjll  lij  OjlLu  t  *1' 

U  44  0 iUi  jul  Ija  gill 2 

pjkj— 4  bl  jib  j;  iiyjbjjj  pi  Uj  jb 

t:  <^Xlj  ££  4  Jf  u  &  fS  \*&  Joij 

i  ijaifj  ijx  i;  ^  ji 


X  ' 


'_y 


i4t 


499.  And  indeed  We  have  sent  down  to  you  manifest  Ayat  and 
none  disbelieve  in  them  but  Fdsiqun  (those  who  rebel  against 
Allah’s  command).) 

4100.  Is  it  not  (the  case)  that  every  time  they  make  a  covenant,  some 


1,1  Muslim  1  :534. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  1 1  :348 . 


m 


TaJsTr  Ibn  Kathir 

party  among  them  throw 
it  aside?  Nay!  (the  truth 
is :)  most  of  them  believe 
not .} 

4101.  And  when  there 
came  to  them  a  Messen¬ 
ger  from  Allah  (i.e.  Mu¬ 
hammad  jg)  confirming 
what  was  with  them,  a 
party  of  those  who  were 
given  the  Scripture  threio 
may  the  Book  of  Allah 
behind  their  backs  as  if 
they  did  not  know! 4 

4102.  They  followed 
what  the  Shayatin  (dev¬ 
ils)  gave  out  (falsely  of 
the  magic)  in  the  lifetime 
of  Sulaymdn  (Solomon). 
Sulaymdn  did  not  disbe¬ 
lieve,  but  the  Shayatin 
(devils)  disbelieved , 
teaching  men  magic  and 
such  things  that  came 
dmon  at  Babylon  to  the 

hoo  angels,  Harut  and  Marut,  but  neither  of  these  tzvo  (angels)  taught 
anyone  (such  things)  till  they  had  said,  "We  arc  for  trial,  so  disbelieve 
not  (by  learning  this  magic  from  us).”  And  from  these  (angels)  people 
learn  that  by  which  they  cause  separation  between  man  and  his  wife, 
but  they  could  not  thus  harm  anyone  except  by  Allah's  leave.  And 
they  learn  that  which  harms  them  and  profits  them  not.  And  indeed 
they  knew  that  the  buyers  of  it  (magic)  would  have  no  share  in  the 
Hereafter.  And  how  bad  indeed  was  that  for  which  they  sold  their  own 
selves,  if  they  but  knew.} 

4103.  And  if  they  Iwd  believed  and  guarded  themselves  from  evil  and 
kept  their  duty  to  Allah,  far  better  would  have  been  the  reward  from 
their  Lord,  if  they  but  knew!} 


u  Su  Vi 

yS&y&AXj&lfi- 

>.  Zt  'it  >,/  t-V?'6*  -  >  >. 


jJj  ^ 

\y&j 


311 


Surah  2.  ALBagarah  (101  - 124)  (Parti} _ 

Proofs  of  Muhammad’s  Prophethood 

Imam  Abu  Jafar  bin  Jarir  said  that  Allah’s  statement, 

45^  Jr 4'» 

indeed  We  have  sent  down  to  you  manifest  Ayafy  means,  “We 
have  sent  to  you,  O  Muhammad,  clear  signs  that  testify  to  your 
prophethood.”  These  Ayat  are  contained  in  the  Book  of  Allah 
(Qur’an)  which  narrates  the  secrets  of  the  knowledge  that  the 
Jews  possess,  which  they  hid,  and  the  stories  of  their  earlier 
generations.  The  Book  of  Allah  also  mentions  the  texts  in  the 
Books  of  the  Jews  that  are  known  to  only  the  rabbis  and 
scholars,  and  the  sections  where  they  altered  and  distorted  the 
rulings  of  the  Tawrah.  Since  Allah  mentioned  all  of  this  in  His 
Book  revealed  to  His  Prophet  Muhammad  jg,  then  this  fact 
alone  should  be  enough  evidence  for  those  who  are  truthful 
with  themselves  and  who  wish  to  avoid  bringing  themselves  to 
destruction  due  to  envy  and  transgression.  Further  human 
instict  testifies  to  the  truth  that  Muhammad  was  sent  with 
and  the  clear  signs  that  he  brought  which  he  did  not  learn  or 
acquire  from  mankind.  Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said 
that, 

V  X  J ' 

iAnd  indeed  We  have  seitt  doion  to  you  manifest  Ayafy  means, 
“You  recite  and  convey  this  Book  to  them  day  and  night, 
although  you  are  an  Ummi  (unlettered)  who  never  read  a  book. 
Yet,  you  inform  them  of  what  they  have  (in  their  own  Books). 
Allah  stated  that  this  fact  should  serve  as  an  example,  a  clear 
sign  and  a  proof  against  them,  if  they  but  knew.”*11 

The  Jews  break  Their  Covenants 

When  the  Messenger  of  Allah  ^  was  sent  and  Allah  reminded 
the  Jews  of  the  covenant  that  they  had  with  Him,  especially 
concerning  Muhammad  0&9  Malik  bin  As-Sayf  said,  “By  Allah! 
Allah  never  made  a  covenant  with  us  about  Muhammad,  nor 
did  He  take  a  pledge  from  us  at  all.”  Allah  then  revealed, 

(1L4¥ 


m 


At-Tabari  2 :397 . 


322 


Tgfsir  [bn  Kgthtr 

<ls  it  not  ( the  case)  that  every  time  they  make  a  covenant,  some 
party  among  them  throw  it  aside ?^(1'  Al- Hasan  Al-Basri  said 
that  Allah’s  statement, 

iNay!  (the  truth  is :)  most  of  them  believe  not )  means,  “There  is 
not  a  promise  that  they  make,  but  they  break  it  and  abandon 
it.  They  make  a  promise  today  and  break  it  tomorrow.  ”I2I 


The  Jews  abandoned  the  Book  of  Allah  and  practiced 
Magic 


As-Suddi  commented  on, 


iAnd  when  there  came  to  them  a  Messenger  front  Allah  (i.e. 
Muhammad  i&)  confirming  what  was  with  them), 

“When  Muhammad  $g  came  to  them,  they  wanted  to  contradict 
and  dispute  with  him  using  the  Tawrah.  However,  the  Tawrah 
and  the  Qur’an  affirmed  each  other.  So  the  Jews  gave  up  on 
using  the  Torah,  and  took  to  the  Book  of  Asaf,13'  and  the  magic 
of  Harut  and  Marut,  which  indeed  did  not  conform  to  the 
Qur’an.  Hence  Allah’s  statement, 


iAs  if  they  did  not  know 
Also,  Qatadah  said  that  Allah's  statement, 


4 As  if  they  did  not  know!$  means,  “They  knew  the  truth  but 
abandoned  it,  hid  it  and  denied  the  fact  that  they  even  had 
it*5) 


I11  At-Tabari  2 :400. 

121  Ibn  AbiHatim  1:295. 

^  Lisdn  Al-Arab  lists  Asaf  as  the  name  of  the  Book  revealed  to  the 
Prophet  Sulaym&n,  peace  be  upon  him.  See  also  the  explanation 
that  follows . 

^  At-Tabari  2  :404 . 

151  Ibid. 


313 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (101  -  124)  (Part-1) _ 

Magic  existed  before  Sulayman  (Solomon) 

As-Suddi  said  that  Allah’s  statement, 


otii  &  tidi\  ljU:  C  !££» 


477iey  follcnoed  what  the  Shayatin  (devils)  gave  out  (falsely  of 
the  magic)  in  the  lifetime  of  Sulayman} 

means,  “During  the  time  of  Prophet  Solomon.’  Beforehand,  the 
devils  used  to  ascend  to  heaven  and  eavesdrop  on  the 
conversations  of  the  angels  about  what  will  occur  on  the  earth 
regarding  death,  other  incidents  or  unseen  matters.  They 
would  convey  this  news  to  the  soothsayers,  and  the 
soothsayers  would  in  turn  convey  the  news  to  the  people.  The 
people  would  believe  what  the  soothsayers  told  them  as  being 
true.  When  the  soothsayers  trusted  the  devils,  the  devils 
started  to  lie  to  them  and  added  other  words  to  the  true  news 
that  they  heard,  to  the  extent  of  adding  seventy  false  words  to 
each  true  word.  The  people  recorded  these  words  in  some 
books.  Soon  after,  the  Children  of  Israel  said  that  the  Jinns 
know  matters  of  the  Unseen.  When  Solomon  was  sent  as  a 
Prophet,  he  collected  these  books  in  a  box  and  buried  it  under 
his  throne;  any  devil  that  dared  get  near  the  box  was  burned. 
Solomon  said,  1  will  not  hear  of  anyone  who  says  that  the 
devils  know  the  Unseen,  but  I  will  cut  off  his  head.’  When 
Solomon  died  and  the  scholars  who  knew  the  truth  about 
Solomon  perished,  there  came  another  generation.  To  them, 
the  devil  materialized  in  the  shape  of  a  human  and  said  to 
some  of  the  Children  of  Israel,  ‘Should  I  lead  you  to  a  treasure 
that  you  will  never  be  able  to  use  up?’  They  said.  “Yes.’  He 
said,  T>ig  under  this  throne,’  and  he  went  with  them  and 
showed  them  Solomon’s  throne.  They  said  to  him,  ‘Come 
closer.’  He  said,  “No.  I  will  wait  for  you  here,  and  if  you  do  not 
find  the  treasure  then  kill  me.’  They  dug  and  found  the  buried 
books,  and  Satan  said  to  them,  ‘Solomon  only  controlled  the 
humans,  devils  and  birds  with  this  magic.’  Thereafter,  the 
news  that  Solomon  was  a  sorcerer  spread  among  the  people, 
and  the  Children  of  Israel  adopted  these  books.  When 
Muhammad  jg  came,  they  disputed  with  him  relying  on  these 
books.  Hence  Allah’s  statement. 


314 


Tfl/sfr  Ibn  Kathir 

iSulayman  did  not  disbelieve,  but  the  Shayatin  (devils) 
disbelieved J*.111 


The  Story  of  Harut  and  Marut,  and  the  Explanation  that 
They  were  Angels 


Allah  said, 

fie.  glll2  Uj  Sjfcj 


iAnd  such  things  that  came  down  at  Babylon  to  the  two 
angels,  Harut  and  Mdriit,  but  neither  of  these  two  (angels) 
taught  anyone  (such  things)  till  they  had  said,  "We  are  for 
trial,  so  disbelieve  not  (by  learning  this  magic  from  us)."  And 
from  these  (angels)  people  learn  that  by  which  they  cause 
separation  between  man  and  his  wife}. 

There  is  a  difference  of  opinion  regarding  this  story.  It  was 
said  that  this  Ayah  denies  that  anything  was  sent  down  to  the 
two  angels,  as  Al-Qurtubi  stated  and  then  referred  to  the  Ayah, 

itfjXL  ^} 


iSulayman  did  not  disbelieve}  saying,  “The  negation  applies  in 
both  cases.  Allah  then  said, 


j!  &  $  fcj  JAM  ojli*  ^jk3i  '&>')} 


iBut  the  Shayatin  (devils)  disbelieved,  teaching  men  magic  and 
such  things  that  came  down  at  Babylon  to  the  tu>o  angels}. 

The  Jews  claimed  that  Gabriel  and  Michael  brought  magic 
down  to  the  two  angels,  but  Allah  refuted  this  false  claim.”*2' 
Also,  Ibn  Jarir  reported,  that  Al-‘Awfi  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
said  about  Allah’s  statement, 

4J&  $  J \j\  tj} 


iAttd  such  things  that  came  down  at  Babylon  to  the  tioo  angels} 
“Allah  did  not  send  magic  down.”*31 

Also,  Ibn  Jarir  narrated  that  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  said  about, 


1,1  At-Tabari  2:405. 
*2*  Al-Qurtubi  2 :50 . 
131  At-Tabari  2:419. 


Surat  2.  ATBagarah  (101  -  124)  (Part-1 


315 


such  things  that  came  doivn  to  the  two  angels},  “Allah  did  not 
send  magic  down  to  the  them.”*1*  Ibn  Jarir  commented,  “This 
is  the  correct  explanation  for  this  Ayah. 


iludL  mii  CfLdli  iJSS  £ 


iThey  followed  what  the  Shaydtin  (devils)  gave  out  (falsely)  in 
the  lifetime  of  Sulaymdn . 

meaning,  magic.  However,  neither  did  Solomon  disbelieve  nor 
did  Allah  send  magic  with  the  two  angels.  The  devils,  on  the 
other  hand,  disbelieved  and  taught  magic  to  the  people  of  the 
Babylon  of  Harut  and  Marut.” 

Ibn  Janr  continued;  “If  someone  asks  about  explaining  this 
Ayah  in  this  manner,  we  say  that, 


clii  £  \JsS  C 


iThey  followed  what  the  Shaydtin  (devils)  gave  out  (falsely)  in 
the  lifetime  of  Sulaymdn . } 

means,  magic.  Solomon  neither  disbelieved  nor  did  Allah  send 
magic  with  the  two  angels.  However,  the  devils  disbelieved  and 
taught  magic  to  the  people  in  the  Babylon  of  Harut  and 
Marut,  meaning  Gabriel  and  Michael,  for  Jewish  sorcerers 
claimed  that  Allah  sent  magic  by  the  words  of  Gabriel  and 
Michael  to  Solomon,  son  of  David.  Allah  denied  this  false  claim 
and  stated  to  His  Prophet  Muhammad  sg  that  Gabriel  and 
Michael  were  not  sent  with  magic.  Allah  also  exonerated 
Solomon  from  practicing  magic,  which  the  devils  taught  to  the 
people  of  Babylon  by  the  hands  of  two  men,  Harut  and  Marut. 
Hence,  Harut  and  Marut  were  two  ordinary  men  (not  angels  or 
Gabriel  or  Michael).”*2*  These  were  the  words  of  At-Tabari,  and 
this  explanation  is  not  plausible. 

Many  among  the  Salaf,  said  that  Harut  and  Marut  were 
angels  who  came  down  from  heaven  to  earth  and  did  what 
they  did  as  the  Ayah  stated.  To  conform  this  opinion  with  the 
fact  that  the  angels  are  immune  from  error,  wc  say  that  Allah 
had  eternal  knowledge  what  these  angels  would  do,  just  as  He 

111  At-Tabari  2:419. 

*2*  Ibid. 


316 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kgthir 


had  eternal  knowledge  that  Iblls  would  do  as  he  did,  while 
Allah  refered  to  him  being  among  the  angels, 


(remember)  when  We  said  to  the  angels:  " Prostrate 
yourselves  before  Adam."  And  they  prostrated  except  Iblfs 
(Satan),  he  refused)  (20:116) 

and  so  forth.  However,  what  Harut  and  Marut  did  was  less  evil 
than  what  Iblls,  may  Allah  curse  him,  did.  Al-Qurtubi  reported 
this  opinion  from  ‘Ali,  Ibn  Mas^ud,  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Ibn  ‘Umar,  Ka‘b 
Al-Ahbar,  As-Suddi  and  Al-Kalbi.*1* 


Learning  Magic  is  Kufr 

Allah  said, 

4  Vi  iiii  If.  llil  'jjii 


iBut  neither  of  these  two  (angels)  taught  anyone  (such  things) 
till  they  had  said,  "We  are  for  trial,  so  disbelieve  not  (by 
learning  this  magic  from  us).) 

Abu  Jafar  Ar-Razi  said  that  Ar-RabI’  bin  Anas  said  that 
Qays  bin  ‘Abbad  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “When  someone 
came  to  the  angels  to  learn  magic,  they  would  discourage  him 
and  say  to  him,  *We  are  only  a  test,  so  do  not  fall  into 
disbelief.’  They  had  knowledge  of  what  is  good  and  evil  and 
what  constitutes  belief  or  disbelief,  and  they  thus  knew  that 
magic  is  a  form  of  disbelief.  When  the  person  who  came  to 
learn  magic  still  insisted  on  learning  it,  they  commanded  him 
to  go  to  such  and  such  place,  where  if  he  went,  Satan  would 
meet  him  and  teach  him  magic.  When  this  man  would  learn 
magic,  the  light  (of  faith)  would  depart  him,  and  he  would  see 
it  shining  (and  flying  away)  in  the  sky.  He  would  then 
proclaim,  "O  my  sorrow!  Woe  unto  me!  What  should  I  do?.”*2' 
Al-Hasan  Al-Basri  said  that  this  Ayah  means,  “The  angels 
were  sent  with  magic,  so  that  the  people  whom  Allah  willed 
would  be  tried  and  tested.  Allah  made  them  promise  that  they 
would  not  teach  anyone  until  first  proclaiming,  We  are  a  test 


*'*  Al-Qurtubi  2 :51 . 

*2'  Ibn  AbiH&tim  1:312. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (101  -  124 )  (Part-1) 


317 


for  you,  do  not  fall  into  disbelief/  11  It  was  recorded  by  Ibn 
Abi  Hatim.  Also,  Qatadah  said,  “Allah  took  their  covenant  to 
not  teach  anyone  magic  until  they  said,  We  are  a  test. 
Therefore,  do  not  fall  in  disbelief/ 

Also,  As-Suddi  said,  “When  a  man  would  come  to  the  two 
angels  they  would  advise  him,  ‘Do  not  fall  into  disbelief.  We 
are  a  test/  When  the  man  would  ignore  their  advice,  they 
would  say,  ‘Go  to  that  pile  of  ashes  and  urinate  on  it/  When 
he  would  urinate  on  the  ashes,  a  light,  meaning  the  light  of 
faith,  would  depart  from  him  and  would  shine  until  it  entered 
heaven.  Then  something  black  that  appeared  to  be  smoke 
would  descend  and  enter  his  ears  and  the  rest  of  his  body, 
and  this  is  Allah’s  anger.  When  he  told  the  angels  what 
happened,  they  would  teach  him  magic.  So  Allah’s  statement, 


Arm 


iBut  neither  of  these  two  (angels)  taught  anyone  (such  things) 
till  tltey  had  said ,  "We  are  for  trial ,  so  disbelieve  not  (by 
learning  this  magic  from 

Sunayd  said  that  Hajjaj  said  that  Ibn  Jurayj  commented  on 
this  Ayah  (2:102),  “No  one  dares  practice  magic  except  a 
disbeliever.  As  for  the  Fitnah ,  it  involves  trials  and  freedom  of 
choice/'141  The  scholars  who  stated  that  learning  magic  is 
disbelief  relied  on  this  Ayah  for  evidence.  They  also  mentioned 
the  Hadlth  that  Abu  Bakr  Al-Bazzar  recorded  from  ‘Abdullah, 
which  states, 


*^5}  /ftp  3  J  l  t/j  fsS>  J-AJ  (J  jJL  Loj  OJLuaJ  I  ^>-  U#  J I  llA  IS” 


8 Whoever  came  to  a  soothsayer  or  a  sorcerer  and  believed  in 
what  he  said,  will  have  disbelieved  in  what  Allah  revealed  to 
Muhammad  sg.B151 

This  Hadith  has  an  authentic  chain  of  narration  and  there 
are  other  Hadtths  which  support  it. 


^  Ibn  Abi  H&tim  1 :310 
121  At-Tabari  2  :443 
At-Tabari  2  :443 . 

141  Ibid. 

[5)  Kashaf  Al-Astar  2  :443 . 


318 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Causing  a  Separation  between  the  Spouses  is  One  of  the 
Effects  of  Magic 


Allah  said, 


iAnd  from  these  (angels)  people  learn  that  by  which  they  cause 
separation  between  man  and  his  wife,} 

This  means,  “The  people  learned  magic  from  Harut  and  Marat 
and  indulged  in  evil  acts  that  included  separating  spouses, 
even  though  spouses  are  close  to,  and  intimately  associate 
with  each  other.  This  is  the  devil’s  work.”  Muslim  recorded 
that  Jabir  bin  ‘Abdullah  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  sg 
said, 


Vx*  j,  p  Js.  pjd  oiklji  ji» 

\j£  Jyu  ^>-  j'sU  cJ j  U  :  J yC*  ^ 

/  Jt  ^  I,  Jx/’  ***  m>'  "**1  1  i  1*1  '  *"  f  •»<  " 

(tc.1  pju  '  u ybj  AoJUj  4j^ij  t  aLa  1 


« Satan  erects  his  throne  on  ivater  and  sends  his  emissaries 
among  the  people.  The  closest  person  to  him  is  the  person  wlw 
causes  the  most  Fitnah .  One  of  them  (a  devil)  would  come  to 
him  and  would  say,  7  kept  inciting  so-and-so,  until  he  said 
such  and  such  words.’  Iblis  says,  'No,  by  Allah,  you  have  not 
done  much.'  Another  deoil  would  come  to  him  and  would  say, 

7  kept  inciting  so-and-so,  until  I  separated  between  him  and  his 
wife.'  Satan  would  draiv  him  closer  and  embrace  him,  saying, 
'Yes,  you  did  well .  1 1 

Separation  between  a  man  and  his  wife  occurs  here  because 
each  spouse  imagines  that  the  other  spouse  is  ugly  or  ill- 
mannered,  etc. 


Allah’s  Appointed  Term  supercedes  Everything 

Allah  said, 

jib  “ji  j4 

m 


Muslim  4  :2167. 


ABut  they  could  not  thus  harm  anyone  except  by  Allah’s  leave}. 
Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  commented,  “Except  by  Allah’s  appointed 
term.”*1*  Further,  Al-Hasan  Al-Basri  said  that, 

4  0%  it  **  (r* 

iBut  they  could  not  thus  harm  anyone  except  by  Allah's  leave } 
means,  “Allah  allows  magicians  to  adversely  affect  whomever 
He  wills  and  saves  whomever  He  wills  from  them.  Sorcerers 
never  bring  harm  to  anyone  except  by  Allah’s  leave.”121  Allah’s 
statement, 

A  And  they  learn  that  which  harms  them  and  profits  them  not.} 
means,  it  harms  their  religion  and  does  not  have  a  benefit 
compared  to  its  harm. 


jL^S'  4  $  U  &  £  ijili  SjJj} 


<And  indeed  they  knew  that  the  buyers  of  it  (magic)  would  have  no 
(Khalaq)  share  in  the  Hereafter.}  meaning,  “The  Jews  who 
preferred  magic  over  following  the  Messenger  of  Allah  sg  knew 
that  those  who  commit  the  same  error  shall  have  no  Khalaq  in 
the  Hereafter.”  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Mujahid  and  As-Suddi  stated  that 
‘no  Khalaq’  means,  ‘no  share.1*3* 

Allah  then  said, 


ijul.  ’ 4 rJj  »a_»  ijjii  ti  ^fill's} 

4  i </>£  ji  j»Li-  JOfc  iy* 


AAnd  hoiv  bad  indeed  ivas  that  for  which  they  sold  their  oivn 
selves,  if  the y  but  knezv.  And  if  they  had  believed  and  guarded 
themselves  from  evil  and  kept  their  duty  to  Allah,  far  better 
would  have  been  the  reward  from  their  Lord,  if  they  but 
knew!}.  Allah  stated, 


4^Uj> 


AAnd  how  bad}  meaning,  what  they  preferred,  magic,  instead  of 
faith  and  following  the  Messenger,  if  they  but  comprehend  the 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :312. 
*2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:311. 
*3*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :314. 


320 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kgthir 


advice. 


4'jf4-  -tit  lyt  ijjll) 


4i4«d  1/  they  had  believed  and  guarded  themselves  from  evil  and 
kept  their  duty  to  Allah,  far  better  would  have  been  the  reward 
from  their  Lord,} 


meaning,  “Had  they  believed  in  Allah  and  His  Messenger  ag 
and  avoided  the  prohibitions,  then  Allah’s  reward  for  these  good 
deeds  would  have  been  better  for  them  than  what  they  chose 
and  preferred  for  themselves.”  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


l^il>  'Jj  Utix»  jji-  ji'  viP 


4Bm/  those  who  had  been  given  (religious)  knowledge  said: 
“Woe  to  you!  The  reward  of  Allah  (in  the  Hereafter)  is  better 
for  those  who  believe  and  do  righteous  good  deeds,  and  this 
none  shall  attain  except  As-Sabirun  (the  patient  in  following  the 
truth) />  (28:80). 


ijiyj  1^5  ijijii  -j  \pc.  04} 

lit  J  .^>01'  l5  ,h' 

ji  ii'j  *t£S  ,>*  *»[)  #  jy>- 


4104.  O  you  who  believe!  Say  not  (to  the  Messenger  s&j  Rd'ina 
but  say  Unzumd  (make  us  understand)  and  hear.  And  for  the 
disbelievers  there  is  a  painful  torment .} 

4105.  Neither  those  who  disbelieve  among  the  People  of  the 
Scripture  (Jews  and  Christians)  nor  Al-Mushrikin  (tlie  idolaters) 
like  that  there  should  be  sent  down  unto  you  any  good  from 
your  Lord.  But  Allah  chooses  for  His  mercy  whom  He  wills. 
And  Allah  is  the  Owner  of  great  bounty .} 


Manners  in  Speech 

Allah  forbade  His  believing  servants  from  imitating  the 
behavior  and  deeds  of  the  disbelievers.  The  Jews  used  to  use 
devious  words  that  hide  what  they  really  meant.  May  Allah’s 
curse  be  upon  them.  When  they  wanted  to  say,  hear  us,’  they 
would  use  the  word  Ra'ina,  which  is  an  insult  (in  Hebrew,  but 
means  hear  us’  in  Arabic).  Allah  said, 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (101  - 124)  (Part-1) 


321 


\iLute-j  tJLg*  Ojlyj)  ji)£0'  oy^i  Ijilfc  o>J' 

p&  Is*-  CX1>  iLL^  (jSis  jij  ^  ulLj  g 

«S*4  ^  ^  «£$  j&  sfc 


iArnong  those  who  are  Jews,  there  are  some  who  displace  words 
from  (their)  right  places  and  sap:  "We  hear  your  word  (O 
Muhammad  and  disobey,"  and  " Hear  and  let  you  (O 

Muhammad  jg)  hear  nothing."  And  Rd'ind  with  a  twist  of 
their  tongues  and  as  a  mockery  of  the  religion  (Islam).  And  if 
only  they  had  said:  "We  hear  and  obey,”  and  "Do  make  us 
understand,"  it  would  have  been  better  for  them,  and  more 
proper;  but  Allah  cursed  them  for  their  disbelief,  so  they  believe 
not  except  a  few}  (4:46). 


Also,  the  Hadiths  stated  that  when  they  would  greet 
Muslims,  they  would  say,  ‘As-Samu  ‘alaykum,’  meaning,  ‘death 
be  to  you’.  This  is  why  we  were  commanded  to  answer  them 
by  saying,  ‘Wa  ‘alaykum,’  meaning,  ‘and  to  you  too’,  then  our 
supplication  against  them  shall  be  answered,  rather  than 
theirs  against  us. 

Allah  forbade  the  believers  from  imitating  the  disbelievers  in 
tongue  or  deed.  Allah  said, 


L<& 


\ijiiit  ijj; 


to 


W#  'i 


Sji\ 


iO  you  who  believe!  Say  not  (to  the  Messenger  Rd'ind  but 
say  Unzumd  (make  us  understand)  and  hear.  And  for  the 
disbelievers  there  is  a  painful  torment}  (2:104). 

Also,  Imam  Ahmad  narrated  that  Ibn  ‘Umar  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  said, 


:  #- 

*(£/• 


,2  V  v-ZUL  «■  LUl  'JZ 

I  Xaju-  j*  jiLiJij  jjiji  Jl» 


.  i 


tin  & 


«/  was  sent  with  the  sword  just  before  the  Last  Hour,  so  that 
Allah  is  worshipped  alone  without  partners.  My  sustenance  was 
provided  for  me  from  under  the  shadow  of  my  spear.  Those  who 
oppose  my  command  were  humiliated  and  made  inferior,  and 


322 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kgfhir 


whoever  imitates  a  people,  he  is  one  of  them. 

Abu  Dawud  narrated  that  the  Prophet  jg  said, 

yi*  (y3-*. 

^Whoever  imitates  a  people  is  one  of  theittM2^ 

These  Hadiths  indicate,  along  with  their  threats  and  warnings, 
that  we  are  not  allowed  to  imitate  the  disbelievers  in  their 
statements,  deeds,  clothes,  feasts,  acts  of  worship,  etc.,  whatever 
actions  of  the  disbelievers  that  were  not  legislated  for  us. 

Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented  on  the  Ayah , 

iSay  not  (to  the  Messenger  ^|)  Ra'ind ^ 

“They  used  to  say  to  the  Prophet  Ar‘ind  samak  (which  is  an 
insult).^3*  Ibn  Abu  Hatim  said  that  it  was  reported  that  Abu 
Al-‘Aliyah,  Abu  Malik,  Ar-Rabf  bin  Anas,  ‘Atiyah  Al-‘Awfi  and 
Qatadah  said  similarly.  *4J  Further,  Mujahid  said,  “Do  not  say 
Ra'ind *  means,  ‘Do  not  dispute’.”*51  Mujahid  said  in  another 
narration,  “Do  not  say,  We  hear  from  you,  and  you  hear  from 
us.*”  Also,  ‘Atikf  said,  “Do  not  say, 

4Rd'ind$t  which  was  a  dialect  that  the  Ansar  used  and  which 
was  forbidden  from  use  by  Allah.”*61 

Also,  As-Suddi  said,  “Rifa‘ah  bin  Zayd,  a  Jewish  man  from 
the  tribe  of  Qaynuqa4,  used  to  come  to  the  Prophet  and  say 
to  him,  ‘Hear,  Ghayr  Musma’in  (let  you  hear  nothing).*  The 
Muslims  used  to  think  that  the  Prophets  are  greeted  and 
honored  with  this  type  of  speech,  and  this  is  why  some  of  them 
used  to  say,  ‘Hear,  let  you  hear  nothing,’  and  so  on,  as 
mentioned  in  Surat  An-Nisa Thereafter,  Allah  forbade  the 
believers  from  uttering  the  word  Ra'ind.9*7*  ‘Abdur- Rahman  bin 

m  Ahmad  2:50. 

*21  Abu  Dawud  4  :314. 

*31  At-Tabari  2  :461 
*41  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :317. 

151  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :318. 

*6]  Ibid. 

1?1  At-Tabari  2  :462 . 


323 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (101  - 124}  (Parti) 

Zayd  bin  Aslam  also  said  similarly.*1' 


The  extreme  Enmity  that  the  Disbelievers  and  the 
People  of  the  Book  have  against  Muslims 


Allah  said  next  (2:105), 

«  £  oj oi  $£15  %  Sj  ^ 


%  «5> 


4 Neither  those  who  disbelieve  among  the  People  of  the  Scripture 
(Jews  and  Christians)  nor  Al-Mushrikin  (the  idolaters),  like  that 
there  should  be  sent  doion  unto  you  any  good  from  your  Lord$. 


Allah  described  the  deep  enmity  that  the  disbelieving 
polytheists  and  People  of  the  Scripture,  whom  Allah  warned 
against  imitating,  have  against  the  believers,  so  that  Muslims 
should  sever  all  friendship  with  them.  Also,  Allah  mentioned 
what  He  granted  the  believers  of  the  perfect  Law  that  He 
legislated  for  their  Prophet  Muhammad  jg.  Allah  said, 


itJiX  jJolii  j>  Sft  itS 


4But  Allah  chooses  for  His  mercy  whom  He  wills.  And  Allah  is 
the  Owner  of  great  bounty^  (2:105). 


:  oti  j'  LC  at  £-*-i  t 

af  alii  ?>  df  &  p> 


4106.  Whatever  a  verse  (revelation)  do  Nansakh  (We  abrogate) 
or  Nunsihd  (cause  to  be  forgotten),  144’  bring  a  better  one  or 
similar  to  it.  Knoio  you  not  that  Allah  is  Able  to  do  all 
things ?} 

4107.  Knoio  you  not  that  it  is  Allah  to  Whom  belongs  the 
dominion  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth?  And  besides  A Halt  you 
have  neither  any  Wall  (protector  or  guardian)  nor  any  helper .}■ 


The  Meaning  of  Naskh 

Ibn  Abi  Talhah  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that, 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3:965. 


324 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathir 


{Whatever  a  verse 
(revelation)  do  Nansakh) 
means,  “Whatever  an 
Ayah  We  abrogate.”1 11 
Also,  Ibn  Jurayj  said 
that  Mujahid  said 
that, 

U  I s> 

{Whatever  a  verse 
(revelation)  do  Nansakh > 
means,  “Whatever  an 
Ayah  We  erase.  ”|21 
Also,  Ibn  Abi  Najih 
said  that  Mujahid  said 
that, 

{Whatever  a  verse 
(revelation)  do  Nansakh ^ 
means,  “We  keep  the 
words,  but  change  the 
meaning.”  He  related 
these  words  to  the 
companions  of  ‘Abdullah  bin  Mas'ud.131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  said  that 
similar  statements  were  mentioned  by  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  and 
Muhammad  bin  Ka*b  Al-Qurazi.14’  Also  As-Suddi  said  that, 

{'&'-  in  t) 

{Whatever  a  verse  (revelation)  do  Nansakh ^  means,  “We  erase 
it.”* 5 1  Further,  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  said  that  it  means,  “Erase  and 

111  At-Tabari  2 :473 
121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:321. 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :322. 

•4|  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :322. 

151  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :322. 


J)  i&lfcS  _  W  »»  ^ 


bt  bt  jjyV  [) 


f  >  *  +• *  A*  \ 


jS» 

jJlIju  \ujj4xAjl  jcx*  i 

^ 


325 


Surah  2.  ALBaggrah  (101  -  124)  (Parti} 

raise  it,  such  as  erasing  the  following  wordings  (from  the 
Qur’an),  The  married  adulterer  and  the  married  adulteress: 
stone  them  to  death,’  and,  If  the  son  of  Adam  had  two  valleys 
of  gold,  he  would  seek  a  third.’  ”*** 

Ibn  Jarir  stated  that, 

4#*'*  in 

{Whatever  a  verse  (revelation)  do  Nansakh }  means,  “Whatever 
ruling  we  repeal  in  an  Ayah  by  making  the  allowed  unlawfiil 
and  the  unlawful  allowed.”  The  Nasakh  only  occurs  with 
commandments,  prohibitions,  permissions,  and  so  forth.  As  for 
stories,  they  do  not  undergo  Nasakh.  The  word,  “ Nasakh ’ 
literally  means,  “to  copy  a  book’.  The  meaning  of  Nasakh  in  the 
case  of  commandments  is  removing  the  commandment  and 
replacing  it  by  another.  And  whether  the  Nasakh  involves  the 
wordings,  the  ruling  or  both,  it  is  still  called  Nasakh .*2* 

Allah  said  next, 

4 or  Nunsihd  (cause  it  to  be  forgotten)}.  ‘Ali  bin  Abi  Talhah  said 
that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that, 

4*4^  jl  £i: 

{Whatever  a  verse  (revelation)  do  Nansakh  or  Nunsihd}  means, 
“Whatever  Ayah  We  repeal  or  uphold  without  change.”*3*  Also, 
Mujahid  said  that  the  companions  of  Ibn  Mas*Qd  (who  read  this 
word  Nansa’ha)  said  that  it  means,  “We  uphold  its  wording  and 
change  its  ruling.”*4*  Further,  TJbayd  bin  TJmayr,  Mujahid  and 
‘Ata’  said,  ‘Nansa’ha'  means,  “We  delay  it  (i.e.,  do  not  abrogate 
it).”*5*  Further,  ‘Atiyyah  Al-‘Awfi  said  that  the  Ayah  means,  “We 
delay  repealing  it."*6*  This  is  the  same  Tafsir  provided  by  As- 
Suddi  and  Ar-Rabi‘  bin  Anas.*7* 


111  IbnAbiHatim  1:324. 
*2*  At-Tabari  1  :472 . 

*3*  At-Tabari  2:476. 

*4*  At-Tabari  2:473. 

*s|  At-Tabari  2:477. 

*6*  Ibid. 

*7*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :326. 


326 _ Tafsir  lbn  Kathjr 

‘Abdur-Razzaq  said  that  Ma'mar  said  that  Qatadah  said 
about  Allah’s  statement, 

#*'*  ly 

4 Whatever  a  verse  (revelation)  do  We  abrogate  or  cause  to  be 
forgotten}  “Allah  made  His  Prophet  jg  forget  what  He  willed  and 
He  abrogated  what  He  will.” 

Allah’s  said, 

iWe  bring  a  better  one  or  similar  to  it},  better,  relates  to  the 
benefit  provided  for  the  one  it  addresses,  as  reported  from  ‘Ali 
bin  Abi  Talhah  that  lbn  ‘Abbas  said, 

jk 

$We  bring  a  better  one}  means,  “We  bring  forth  a  more  beneficial 
ruling,  that  is  also  easier  for  you.”*11  Also,  As-Suddi  said  that, 

$  Qi  jk> 

$We  bring  a  better  one  or  similar  to  it}  means,  “We  bring  forth  a 
better  Ayah,  or  similar  to  that  which  was  repealed.”121  Qatadah 
also  said  that, 

ifyk  3'  jk> 

4We  bring  a  better  one  or  similar  to  it}  means,  “We  replace  it  by 
an  Ayah  more  facilitating,  permitting,  commanding,  or 
prohibiting.”13* 


Naskh  occurs  even  though  the  Jews  deny  it 

Allah  said, 

lij  ^  jc  ill'  y 

4><j^  yU  £*?  ji*  Ojj  Ji 


iKnoio  you  not  that  Allah  is  Able  to  do  all  things?  Know  you 
not  that  it  is  Allah  to  Whom  belongs  the  dominion  of  the 
heavens  and  the  earth?  And  besides  Allah  you  have  neither  any 


111  At-Jabari  2:481. 

121  lbn  Abi  Hatim  1:327. 
131  lbn  Abi  Hatim  1  :327. 


327 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (101  -  124)  (Part-1) 

Waif  (protector  or  guardian)  nor  any  helper}. 

Allah  directed  His  servants  to  the  fact  that  He  alone  is  the 
Owner  of  His  creatures  and  that  He  does  with  them  as  He 
wills.  Indeed,  His  is  the  supreme  authority  and  all  creation  is 
His,  and  just  as  He  created  them  as  He  wills,  He  brings 
happiness  to  whom  He  wills,  misery  to  whom  He  wills,  health 
to  whom  He  wills  and  ailment  to  whom  He  wills.  He  also 
brings  success  to  whom  He  wills  and  failure  to  whom  He  wills. 
He  judges  between  His  servants  as  He  wills,  allows  what  He 
wills  and  disallows  what  He  wills.  He  decides  what  He  wills, 
there  is  no  opponent  for  His  judgment,  and  no  one  can 
question  Him  about  what  He  does,  while  they  shall  be 
questioned.  He  tests  His  servants  and  their  obedience  to  His 
Messengers  by  the  Naskh .  He  commands  a  matter  containing 
a  benefit  which  He  knows  of,  and  then  He  out  of  His  wisdom, 
prohibits  it.  Hence,  perfect  obedience  is  realized  by  adhering  to 
His  commands,  following  His  Messengers,  believing  in  what 
ever  they  convey,  implementing  their  commands  and  avoiding 
what  they  prohibit. 

The  statements  of  Allah  here  contain  tremendous  benefit, 
prove  that  the  Jews  are  disbelievers  and  refute  their  claim  that 
Naskh  does  not  occur,  may  Allah  curse  the  Jews.  In  ignorance 
and  arrogance  they  claimed  that  the  sound  mind  stipulates 
that  Naskh  does  not  occur.  Some  of  them  falsely  claimed  that 
there  are  divine  texts  that  dismiss  the  possibility  that  Naskh 
occurred. 

Imam  Abu  JaTar  bin  Jarir  said,  “The  Ayah  means,  T)o  you 
not  know,  O  Muhammad,  that  I  alone  own  the  heavens  and 
the  earth  and  that  I  decide  whatever  I  will  in  them?  I  forbid 
whatever  I  will,  change  and  repeal  whatever  I  will  of  My 
previous  rulings,  whenever  I  will.  I  also  uphold  whatever  I 
will.” 

Ibn  Jarir  then  said,  “Although  Allah  directed  His  statement 
indicating  His  greatness  towards  His  Prophet  He  also 
rejected  the  lies  of  the  Jews  who  denied  that  the  rulings  of  the 
Torah  could  undergo  Naskh.  The  Jews  also  denied  the 
prophethood  of  Jesus  and  Muhammad,  because  of  their  dislike 
for  what  they  brought  from  Allah,  such  as  changing  some 
rulings  of  the  Torah,  as  Allah  commanded.  Allah  thus 
proclaimed  to  the  Jews  that  He  owns  the  heavens  and  earth 


328 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


and  also  all  authority  in  them.  Further,  the  subjects  in  Allah's 
kingdom  are  His  creation,  and  they  are  required  to  hear  and 
obey  His  commands  and  prohibitions.  Allah  has  full  authority 
to  command  the  creation  as  He  wills,  forbidding  them  from 
what  He  wills,  abrogate  what  He  wills,  uphold  what  He  wills, 
and  decide  whatever  commandments  and  prohibitions  He 
wills.”11* 


I  (Ibn  Kathir)  say  that  the  Jews'  dismissal  of  the  occurrence 
of  the  Naskh  is  only  a  case  of  their  disbelief  and  rebellion.  The 
sound  mind  does  not  deny  that  there  could  be  a  Naskh  in 
Allah’s  commandments,  for  He  decides  what  He  wills,  just  as 
He  does  what  He  wills.  Further,  Naskh  occurred  in  previous 
Books  and  Law.  For  instance,  Allah  allowed  Adam  to  marry 
his  daughters  to  his  sons  and  then  later  forbade  this  practice. 
Allah  also  allowed  Nuh  to  eat  from  all  kinds  of  animals  after 
they  left  the  ark,  then  prohibited  eating  some  types  of  foods. 
Further,  marrying  two  sisters  to  one  man  was  allowed  for 
Israel  and  his  children,  but  Allah  prohibited  this  practice  later 
in  the  Torah.  Allah  commanded  Abraham  to  slaughter  his  son, 
then  repealed  that  command  before  it  was  implemented.  Also, 
Allah  commanded  the  Children  of  Israel  to  kill  those  who 
worshipped  the  calf  and  then  repealed  that  command,  so  that 
the  Children  of  Israel  were  not  all  exterminated.  There  are 
many  other  instances  that  the  Jews  admit  have  occurred,  yet 
they  ignore  them.  Also,  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that  their  Books 
foretold  about  Muhammad  gg  and  contained  the  command  to 
follow  him.  These  texts,  in  their  Books,  indicate  that  the  Jews 
were  required  to  follow  the  Prophet  Muhammad  jg  and  that  no 
good  deed  would  be  accepted  from  them,  unless  it  conformed  to 
Muhammad's  Law.  The  Prophet  gg  brought  another  Book,  -  the 
Qur'an  which  is  the  last  revelation  from  Allah. 


il08.  Or  do  you  want  to  ask  your  Messenger  (Muhammad 
as  Musa  (Moses)  was  asked  before  (i.e.  show  us  openly  our 
Lord)?  And  he  who  changes  faith  far  disbelief,  verily ,  he  has 


At-Tabari  2  :488 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (101  -  124)  (Part-1) 
gone  astray  from  the  right  way.) 


329 


The  Prohibition  of  Unnecessary  Questions 


In  this  Ayah,  Allah  forbade  the  believers  from  asking  the 
Prophet  numerous  questions  about  matters  that  did  not 
occur  yet.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


£  Jl  £  IjfcS  \pC  ^ 

l. 

a: 


40  i/oh  w>/io  believe!  Ask  not  about  things  which,  if  made  plain 
to  you,  may  cause  you  trouble.  But  if  you  ask  about  them  while 
the  Qur'an  is  being  revealed,  they  will  be  made  plain  to  you) 
(5:101). 


This  Ayah  means,  “If  you  ask  about  a  matter  after  it  is 
revealed,  it  shall  be  duly  explained  to  you.  Therefore,  do  not 
ask  about  matters  that  have  not  occurred  yet,  for  they  might 
become  prohibited,  due  to  your  questions.”  This  is  why  the 
Sahih  narrated, 


»#■  k 


«77ie  greatest  criminal  among  the  Muslims  is  the  one  who  asks 
if  a  thing  is  prohibited ,  which  is  not  prohibited,  and  it  becomes 
prohibited  because  of  his  asking  about  it.* 

This  is  why  when  the  Messenger  of  Allah  was  asked  about 
a  husband  who  finds  another  man  with  his  wife;  if  he  exposes 
the  adultery,  he  will  be  exposing  a  major  incident;  if  he  is  quiet 
about  it,  he  will  be  quiet  about  a  major  matter.  The  Messenger 
of  Allah  jg  did  not  like  such  questions.  Later  on,  Allah  revealed 
the  ruling  of  Mula'anah  [Refer  to  Nur  24:6-9  in  the  Qur’an].  The 
Two  Sahths  recorded  that  Al-Mughlrah  bin  Shuhah  said  that 
the  Messenger  of  Allah  “Forbade  saying,  *It  was  said*  and  ‘He 
said/  and  wasting  money  and  asking  many  questions 11 
Muslim  recorded  that  the  Prophet  jg  said, 


m 


Fath  Al-Bdri  3 :398 ,  and  Muslim  3 : 1 34 1 . 


330 


Tgfsir  Ibn  Kathtr 


cleave  me  as  I  leave  you;  those  before  you  zvcre  only  destroyed 
because  of  their  excessive  questioning  and  disputing  with  their 
Prophets.  Therefore,  when  /  command  you  with  a  matter, 
adhere  to  it  as  much  as  you  can,  and  when  l  forbid  from 
something,  avoid  itJ 

The  Prophet  only  said  this  after  he  told  the  Companions 
that  Allah  has  ordered  them  to  perform  Hajj.  A  man  asked, 
“Every  year,  O  Messenger  of  Allah?”  The  Prophet  ag  did  not 
answer  him,  but  he  repeated  his  question  three  times.  Then  the 
Prophet  ajg  said, 


0 


“No.  Had  I  said  yes,  it  would  have  been  ordained,  and  you 
would  not  have  been  able  to  implement 


This  is  why  Anas  bin  Malik  said,  “We  were  forbidden  from 
asking  the  Messenger  of  All&h  sg  about  things.  So  we  were 
delighted  when  a  bedouin  man  would  come  and  ask  him  while 
we  listened.”121 


Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  said  that  Muhammad  bin  Abi 
Muhammad  told  him  that  Ikrimah  or  Said  said  that  Ibn 
‘Abbas  said  that  Rafi‘  bin  Huraymilah  or  Wahb  bin  Zayd  said, 
“O  Muhammad!  Bring  us  a  Book  sent  down  from  heaven  and 
which  we  could  read,  and  make  some  rivers  flow  for  us,  then 
we  will  follow  you  and  believe  in  you.”  Allah  sent  down  the 
answer  to  this  challenge, 


S 4-^-5  i>*j  £  Oi  (yy  <3f- 


iOr  do  you  want  to  ask  your  Messenger  (Muhammad  $g)  as 
Musa  was  asked  before  (i.e.  show  us  openly  our  Lord)?  And  he 
who  changes  faith  for  disbelief,  verily,  he  has  gone  astray  from 
the  right  way^fo* 

Allah  criticized  those  who  ask  the  Messenger  of  Allah  sg 
about  a  certain  matter  just  for  the  purpose  of  being  difficult, 
just  as  the  Children  of  Israel  asked  Musa  out  of  stubbornness, 


111  Muslim  2:975. 

121  Muslim  1:41. 

■3|  At-Jabari  2:490. 


332 


Surah  2.  AI-Baqarah  (101  -  224)  (Part-1) 


rejection  and  rebellion.  Allah  said, 


4A»d  he  who  changes  faith  for  disbelief ^  meaning,  whoever  prefers 
disbelief  to  faith, 

4j ifj-*  j-i 

✓  V 


iverily,  he  has  gone  astray  from  the  right  way}  meaning,  he  has 
strayed  from  the  straight  path,  to  the  path  of  ignorance  and 
misguidance.  This  is  the  case  of  those  who  deviated  from 
accepting  the  Prophets  and  obeying  them  and  those  who  kept 
asking  their  Prophets  unnecessary  questions  in  defiance  and 
disbelief,  just  as  Allah  said, 


j'j  'jib’ll  i <»'  ipi  jff  jj  y 

f 


}Have  you  not  seat  those  who  have  changed  the  blessings  of 
Allah  into  disbelief  (by  denying  Prophet  Muhammad  sg  and  his 
Message  of  Islam),  and  caused  their  people  to  dwell  in  the  house 
of  destruction ?  Hell,  in  which  they  will  burn  and  what  an  evil 
place  to  settle  in!}  (14:28-29). 

Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  commented,  “They  exchanged  comfort  for 
hardship.”1 11 


1 &  bi  4^  CJt 

iii  i yvciSj  \ys&  C  V»ji  tifi  t»  Juu  ^  1 

JLig  \yjjj  Uj  JjS3»  iytij  ijlXil'  [4-^J  ji=» 

4  j)  /lit 


4209.  Many  of  the  People  of  the  Scripture  (Jews  and 
Christians)  wish  that  tltey  could  turn  you  away  as  disbelievers 
after  you  have  believed,  out  of  envy  from  their  own  selves,  even 
after  the  truth  (that  Muliammad  jg  is  Allah's  Messenger)  has 
become  manifest  unto  them.  But  forgive  and  overlook,  till  Allah 
brings  His  command.  Verily,  Allah  is  able  to  do  all  things.} 

illO.  And  perform  the  Salah  and  give  the  Zakdh,  and  whatever 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :330. 


332 


Tafstr  I bn  Kathir 

of  good  you  said  forth  for  yourselves  before  you,  you  shall  find 
it  with  Allah.  Certainly,  Allah  is  the  Seer  of  what  you  do.} 


The  Prohibition  of  following  the  Ways  of  the  People  of 
the  Book 

Allah  warned  His  believing  servants  against  following  the 
ways  of  the  People  of  Book,  who  publicly  and  secretly  harbor 
emnity  and  hatred  for  the  believers,  and  who  envy  the 
believers,  while  they  recognize  the  virtue  of  the  believers  and 
their  Prophet  jg.  Allah  also  commanded  His  believing  servants 
to  forgive  them  and  to  be  patient  with  them,  until  Allah  delivers 
His  aid  and  victory  to  them.  Allah  commanded  the  believers  to 
perform  the  prayer  perfectly,  to  pay  the  Zakah  and  He 
encouraged  them  to  preserve  the  practice  of  these  righteous 
deeds. 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  recorded  that  ‘Abdullah  bin  Ka*b  bin  Malik 
said  that  Ka*b  bin  Al-Ashraf,  who  was  a  Jew  and  a  poet,  used 
to  criticize  the  Prophet  ^  in  his  poems,  so  Allah  revealed, 

3  v 

iMany  of  the  People  of  the  Scripture  (Jews  and  Christians) 
wish  that  they  could  turn  you  away..}  regarding  his 
matter.1*1 


Also,  Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “An  unlettered 
Messenger  came  to  the  People  of  the  Scriptures  confirming 
what  they  have  in  their  own  Books  about  the  Messengers  and 
the  Ayat  of  Allah.  He  also  believes  in  all  of  this,  just  as  they 
believe  in  it.  Yet,  they  rejected  the  Prophet  out  of  disbelief, 
envy  and  transgression.  This  is  why  Allah  said, 


fliiS 


iout  of  envy  from  their  (non  selves,  even  after  the  truth  (that 
Muhammad  jgj  is  Allah's  Messenger)  has  become  manifest  unto 
them}. 

Allah  said  that  after  He  illuminated  the  truth  for  them,  such 
that  they  were  not  ignorant  of  any  of  it,  yet  their  envy  made 
them  deny  the  Prophet  jg.  Thus  Allah  criticized,  chastised  and 


m 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :331 . 


333 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (101  -  124)  (Part-1) 


denounced  them.”1 11  Allah  legislated  the  characteristics  that 
His  Prophet  2g  and  the  believers  should  adhere  to:  belief,  faith 
and  accepting  what  Allah  revealed  to  them  and  to  those  before 
them  out  of  His  generosity  and  tremendous  kindness. 

Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  said  that, 

ifrom  their  own  selves}  means,  “of  their  making.”*2’  Also,  Abu 
Al-‘Aliyah  said  that, 

pm*#  & 


ieven  after  the  truth  (that  Muhammad  jg  is  Allah's  Messenger) 
has  become  manifest  unto  them  } 

means,  “After  it  became  clear  that  Muhammad  jg  is  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  whom  they  find  written  of  in  the  Torah  and 
the  Injll.  They  denied  him  in  disbelief  and  transgression 
because  he  was  not  one  of  them.’’*31  Qatadah  and  Ar-Rabl‘  bin 
Anas  said  similarly.14’  Allah  said, 


'if  $  &  \fd&} 


iBut  forgive  and  overlook,  till  Allah  brings  His  command .}  this  is 
similar  to  His  saying; 


iAnd  you  slwll  certainly  hear  much  that  will  grieve  you  from 
those  who  received  the  Scripture  before  you  (Jews  and 
Christians)  and  from  those  who  ascribe  partners  to  Allah } 
(3:186). 

‘Ali  bin  Abi  Talhah  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  Allah’s 
statement, 


ilj\  if  qfc  i^iifj  \f&} 


iBut  forgive  and  overlook,  till  Allah  brings  His  command.}  was 
abrogated  by  the  Ayah, 


111  At-Tabari  2:502. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :332. 
131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :335. 
141  Ibid. 


334 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlur 


iZSU*  ^  W 

iThen  kill  the  Mushrikin  wherever  you  find  them )  (9:5),  and, 

-i£\  ^ 


against  those  who  believe  not  in  Allah,  nor  in  the  Last  Day) 
(9:29)  until, 

4^j>w  fa) 

iAnd  feel  themselves  subdued)  (9:29). 

Allah’s  pardon  for  the  disbelievers  was  repealed.”1 11  Abu  Al- 
‘Aliyah,  Ar-Rab!‘  bin  Anas,  Qatadah  and  As-Suddi121  said 
similarly:  It  was  abrogated  by  the  Ayah  of  the  sword." 
(Mentioned  above).  The  Ayah, 


itill  Allah  brings  His  command.)  gives  further  support  for  this 
view. 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  recorded  Usamah  bin  Zayd  saying  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  and  his  Companions  used  to  forgive  the 
disbelievers  and  the  People  of  the  Book,  just  as  Allah 
commanded  in  His  statement, 


{But  forgive  and  overlook,  till  Allah  brings  His  command. 
Verily,  Allah  is  able  to  do  all  things). 

The  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  used  to  forgive  them  and  was 
patient  with  them  as  Allah  ordered  him,  until  Allah  allowed 
fighting  them.  Then  Allah  destroyed  those  who  He  decreed  to  be 
killed  among  the  strong  men  of  Quraysh,  by  the  Prophet’s 
forces.*31  The  chain  of  narration  for  this  text  is  Sahih,  but  I  did 
not  see  its  wordings  in  the  six  collections  of  Hadith,  although 
the  basis  of  it  is  in  the  Two  Sahths,  narrated  from  Usamah  bin 
Zayd.*41 

111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :334. 

■2|  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :335. 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :333 . 

141  Fath  Al-Bari  8  :87 ,  and  Muslim  3 : 1422 . 


335 


Surah  2.  AhBtujgrah  (101  - 124)  (Parti} 


The  Encouragement  to  perform  Good  Deeds 

Allah  said, 

i%\  jc*  t/4  Jfo  &  \j$  Uj  yfi><  l>.j  ;j£5rt 


}And  perform  the  Salat i  and  give  the  Zakah,  and  whatever  of 
good  you  send  forth  for  yourselves  before  you,  you  shall  find  it 
with  Allah}. 


Allah  encouraged  the  believers  to  busy  themselves  in 
performing  deeds  that  would  bring  them  benefit  and  reward  on 
the  Day  of  Resurrection,  such  as  prayer  and  paying  Zakah. 
This  way,  they  will  gain  Allah’s  aid  in  this  life  and  on  a  Day 
when  the  witnesses  testify, 


4:f ijt  &  a-jft  pj  £  *  tk> 


4The  Day  when  their  excuses  will  be  of  no  profit  to  Die  Zalimin 
(wrongdoers).  Theirs  will  be  the  curse,  and  theirs  will  be  the  evil 
abode  (i.e.  painful  torment  in  Hell-fire)}  (40:52). 

This  is  why  Allah  said, 


I It  6}> 


4 Certainly ,  Allah  sees  zohat  you  do},  meaning,  that  He  is  never 
unaware  of  the  deeds  of  any  person,  nor  will  these  deeds  be 
lost  by  Him.  Whether  deeds  are  righteous  or  evil,  Allah  will 
award  each  according  to  what  he  or  she  deserves  based  on 
their  deeds. 


pteA  dh  i*  ^  SSJff  £*  o> 

YA  0—-^  Aj  A  mXj  o*  &  oj 

^  ■*  iif  Jii  6^3:  ^  ^ 


4H2.  And  f/iey  say,  "None  shall  enter  Paradise  unless  he  be  a 
Jezo  or  a  Christian."  These  are  their  awn  desires.  Say  ( O 
Muhamtnad  3%),  "Produce  your  Burltdn  if  you  are  truthful."} 

4112.  Yes!  But  whoever  submits  his  face  (himself)  to  Allah  (i.e. 
follows  Allah's  religion  of  Islamic  Monotheism)  and  he  is  a 
Multsin  then  his  reward  is  with  his  Lord  (Allah),  on  such  shall 


336 


Tafsir  [bn  Kaffir 

be  no  fear,  nor 
shall  they  grieve.} 

4223.  The  ]ews  said  that 
the  Christians  follow 
nothing  (i.e.  are  not  on 
the  right  religion);  and 
the  Christians  said  that 
the  Jews  fallow 
(i.e.  are  not  on  the  right 
religion) ;  though  they 
both  recite  the  Scripture. 
Like  unto  their  word, 
said  those  (the  pagans) 
who  know  not.  Allah 
will  judge  between  them 
on  the  Day  of  Resurrec¬ 
tion  about  that  wherein 
they  have  been 
differing .} 

The  Hopes  of  the 
People  of  the  Book 

Allah  made  the 
confusion  of  the  Jews 
and  the  Christians 
clear,  since  they  claim  that  no  one  will  enter  Paradise,  unless 
he  is  a  Jew  or  a  Christian.  Similarly,  Allah  mentioned  their 
claims  in  Surat  Al-Ma’idah: 

Ji  5#  £*► 

iWe  are  the  children  of  Allah  and  His  loved  ones}  (5:18). 

Allah  refuted  this  false  claim  and  informed  them  that  they 
will  be  punished  because  of  their  sins.  Previously  we 
mentioned  their  claim  that  the  Fire  would  not  touch  them  for 
more  than  a  few  days,  after  which  they  would  be  put  in 
Paradise.  Allah  rebuked  this  claim,  and  He  said  about  this 
baseless  claim. 


iThese  are  their  own  desires }.  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  commented,  “These 
are  wishes  that  they  wished  Allah  would  answer,  without 
basis.”11*  Similar  was  stated  by  Qatadah  and  Ar-Rabi‘  bin 
Anas.*2*  Allah  then  said, 

4$} 

iSay}  meaning,  “Say  O  Muhammad:” 


4" Produce  your  Burhtin . .."}  meaning,  “Your  proof’,  as  Abu  Al- 
‘Aliyah,  Mujahid,  As-Suddi  and  Ar-Rabf  bin  Anas  stated.*3* 
Qatadah  said  that  the  Ayah  means,  “Bring  the  evidence  that 
supports  your  statement, 

iifyou  are  truthful}  in  your  claim.”*4’ 

Allah  then  said, 

T  0—?*  A  O* 

4  Yes/  But  whoever  submits  his  face  (himself)  to  Allah  (i  .e .  follows 
Allah's  religion  of  Islamic  Monotheism)  and  he  is  a  Muhsin ^ 

meaning,  “Whoever  performs  deeds  in  sincerity,  for  Allah  alone 
without  partners.”  In  a  similar  statement,  Allah  said, 


4 So  if  they  dispute  with  you  (Muhammad  m)  say:  "/  have 
submitted  myself  to  Allah  (in  Islam),  and  (so  have)  those  who 
follow  me.”}  (3:20) 

Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  and  Ar-Rabl‘  said  that, 

4k  mw  fid  &¥ 

4 Yes!  But  whoever  submits  his  face  (himself)  to  Allah}  means, 
“Whoever  is  sincere  with  Allah. ”‘s* 


I1*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:336. 
*2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :336. 
131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :337 . 
*4*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :337. 
*5*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:337. 


338 


Tafsir  ttm  Kathfr 


Also,  Said  bin  Jubayr  said  that, 

iYes!  But  whoever  submits >  means,  he  is  sincere. 


this  face  (himself)}  meaning,  in  his  religion.*1' 


'  Joi 


iatid  he  is  a  Muhsin }  following  the  Messenger  jg.  For  there  are 
two  conditions  for  deeds  to  be  accepted;  the  deed  must  be 
performed  for  Allah’s  sake  alone  and  conform  to  the  SharVah. 
When  the  deed  is  sincere,  but  does  not  conform  to  the  Shari'ah, 
then  it  will  not  be  accepted.  The  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 

*  ^  j  ^  A ® 


^Whoever  performs  a  deed  that  does  not  conform  with  our 
matter  (religion),  then  it  will  be  rejected  J 

This  Hadlth  was  recorded  by  Muslim.121  Therefore,  the  good 
deeds  of  the  priests  and  rabbis  will  not  be  accepted,  even  if 
they  are  sincerely  for  Allah  alone,  because  these  deeds  do  not 
conform  with  the  method  of  the  Messenger  >g,  who  was  sent 
for  all  mankind.  Allah  said  regarding  such  cases, 


i  :  jli  Ji  ijU*  £  ILoi j} 


iAnd  We  shall  turn  to  whatever  deeds  they  (disbelievers, 
polytheists,  sinners)  did,  and  We  shall  make  such  deeds  as 
scattered  floating  particles  of  dust.}  (25:23) 


'j)  Cilllii!'  ’*■  r.tf  ivi  iffj} 


4 As  for  those  who  disbelieved,  their  deeds  are  like  a  mirage  in  a 
desert.  The  thirsty  one  thinks  it  to  be  water,  until  he  comes  tip 
to  it,  he  finds  it  to  be  nothing.}  (24:39)  and. 


T  ^  jrf  U*  ^  r  V 


.Vi 


4 Some  faces ,  that  Day  will  be  humiliated.  Laboring ,  weary. 


I11  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :338. 
121  Muslim  3:1344. 


339 


Surah  2.  AbSagargh  (101  -  124)  ( Partll 


They  will  enter  in  the  hot  blazing  Fire.  They  will  be  given  to 
drink  from  a  boiling  spring )  (88:2-5). 

When  the  deed  conforms  to  the  Shari'ah  outwardly,  but  the 
person  did  not  perform  it  sincerely  for  Allah  alone,  the  deed 
will  also  be  rejected,  as  in  the  case  of  the  hypocrites  and  those 
who  do  their  deeds  to  show  off.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


'1\  dj/Sx  "fa  .U 


4 Verily,  the  hypocrites  seek  to  deceive  Allah,  but  it  is  He  Who 
deceives  them.  And  when  they  stand  up  for  As-Saldh  (the 
prayer),  they  stand  with  laziness  to  be  seen  by  people,  and  they 
do  not  remember  Allah  but  little.)  (4:142)  and, 


4So  woe  unto  those  performers  of  Salah  (prayers)  Qiypocrites) . 
Those  who  delay  their  Salah  (from  their  stated  fixed  times). 
Those  who  do  good  deeds  only  to  be  seen  (of  men).  And 
withhold  Al-Md'iin  (small  kindnesses ))  (107:4-7). 


This  is  why  Allah  said, 

ifj  mCm  4/-i  Vj  -*y  iS 


4 So  whoever  hopes  for  the  meeting  with  his  Lord,  let  him  work 
righteousness  and  associate  none  as  a  partner  in  the  worship  of 
his  Lord)  ( 18:110). 

He  also  said  in  this  Ayah, 


4Yes,  but  whoever  submits  his  face  (himself)  to  Allah  (follows 
Allah's  religion  of  Islamic  Monotheism)  and  he  is  a  Mulisin^. 

Allah’s  statement, 


iShall  have  their  reward  with  their  Lord,  on  them  shall  be  no 
fear,  nor  shall  they  grieve } 

guaranteed  them  the  rewards  and  safety  from  what  they  fear 
and  should  avoid. 


340 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 


A'rj&  SSfr 

iThere  shall  be  no  fear  on  them )  in  the  future, 

inor  shall  they  grieve )  about  what  they  abandoned  in  the  past. 
Moreover,  Said  bin  Jubayr  said, 

"iThere  shall  be  no  fear  on  them)  in  the  Hereafter,  and 

inor  shall  they  grieve)  about  their  imminent  death.”*1* 


The  Jews  and  Christians  dispute  among  Themselves  out 
of  Disbelief  and  Stubbornness 


Allah  said, 

(V*J  }&•  •(i'  liy-UaJ'  V— J  o) $j) 


iThe  Jews  said  that  the  Christians  follow  nothing  (i.e.  are  not 
on  the  right  religion);  and  the  Christians  said  that  the  Jews 
follow  nothing  (i.e.  are  not  on  the  right  religion);  though  they 
both  recite  the  Scripture.) 

Allah  explained  the  disputes,  hatred  and  stubbornness  that 
the  People  of  the  Book  have  towards  each  other.  Muhammad 
bin  Ishaq  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “When  a  delegation  of 
Christians  from  Najran  came  to  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jgj,  the 
Jewish  rabbis  came  and  began  arguing  with  them  before  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  j||.  Rafi*  bin  Huraymilah  said,  “You  do  not 
follow  anything,’  and  he  reiterated  his  disbelief  in  Jesus  and 
the  Injll.  Then  a  Christian  man  from  Najran’s  delegation  said  to 
the  Jews,  ‘Rather,  you  do  not  follow  anything,’  and  he 
reiterated  his  rejection  of  Musa’s  prophethood  and  his  disbelief 
in  the  Torah.  So  Allah  revealed  the  Ayah, 


***  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :338. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (101  - 124}  (Part-1) 


341 


[>-*J  •ij?’  1jJ3'  yJSj  ji*  'j  ■  -j  oJ^j  ^ 


4The  Jews  said  that  the  Christians  follow  nothing  (i.e.  are  not 
on  the  right  religion);  and  the  Christians  said  that  the  Jews 
follow  nothing  (i.e.  are  not  on  the  right  religion);  though  they 
both  recite  the  Scripture .}"['] 

Allah  made  it  clear  that  each  party  read  the  affirmation  of 
what  they  claimed  to  reject  in  their  Book.  Consequently,  the 
Jews  disbelieve  in  Jesus,  even  though  they  have  the  Torah  in 
which  Allah  took  their  Covenant  by  the  tongue  of  Moses  to 
believe  in  Jesus.  Also,  the  Gospel  contains  Jesus’  assertion 
that  Moses’  prophethood  and  the  Torah  came  from  Allah.  Yet, 
each  parly  disbelieved  in  what  the  other  party  had. 

Allah  said, 

&  SJ&  y  jiS  S0} 

iLike  unto  their  word,  said  those  who  know  not} 

thus  exposing  the  ignorance  displayed  by  the  Jews  and  the 
Christians  concerning  their  statements  that  we  mentioned. 
There  is  a  difference  of  opinion  regarding  the  meaning  of 
Allah’s  statement, 

idJjjo  Y  U&} 


iwho  know  not} 

For  instance,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  and  Qatadah  said  that, 
idyll*,  y  jiS 

iLike  unto  their  word,  said  tlwse  said  those  who  know  not} 

means,  “The  Christians  said  similar  statements  to  the 
Jews.”121  Ibn  Jurayj  asked  ‘Ata’  “Who  are  those  ‘who  know 
not?”  ‘Ata’  said,  “Nations  that  existed  before  the  Jews  and  the 
Christians  and  before  the  Torah  and  the  Gospel.”131  Also,  As- 
Suddi  said  that, 

idj&  Y  Si? 

111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :339. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:341. 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :340 . 


342 


Tafsir  ttm  Kaffnr 


isaid  those  who  know  not} 

is  in  reference  to  the  Arabs  who  said  that  Muhammad  jg  was 
not  following  anything  (i.e.  did  not  follow  a  true  or  existing 
religion).'1'  Abu  Jafar  bin  Jarir  chose  the  view  that  this  Ayah 
is  general  and  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  specifically 
supports  any  of  these  explanations.  So  interpreting  the  Ayah  in 
a  general  way  is  better.  Allah  knows  best. 

Allah  said, 


KM*  « x  c*  m  z  P 


iAllah  will  judge  between  them  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection 
about  that  wherein  they  have  been  differing .} 


meaning,  that  Allah  will  gather  them  all  on  the  Day  of  Return. 
On  that  Day,  Allah  will  justly  judge  between  them,  for  He  is 
never  unjust  with  anyone,  even  as  little  as  the  weight  of  an 
atom.  This  Ayah  is  similar  to  Allah’s  statement  in  Surat  Al-Hajj 
(22:17), 


%  dA  Sji;  '4PS  !&  1$  & 


iVerily,  those  who  believe  (in  Allah  and  in  His  Messenger 
Muhammad  and  those  who  are  Jews,  and  the  Sabians,  and 
the  Christians,  and  the  Majus,  and  those  who  associate  partners 
with  Allah;  truly,  Allah  will  judge  between  them  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection.  Verily,  Allah  is  over  all  things  a  Witness}. 

Allah  said, 


iSay:  " Our  Lord  will  assemble  us  all  together  (on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection),  then  He  will  judge  between  us  with  truth.  And 
He  is  the  Just  Judge,  the  Knower  of  the  true  state  of  affairs."} 
(34:26). 


j  &U  C'2\ 


4114.  And  who  are  more  unjust  than  those  toho  forbid  that 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :340. 


343 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (101  -  124}  (Part-1) 

Allah's  Name  be  mentioned  (i.e.  prayers  and  invocations)  in 
Allah's  Masjids  and  strive  for  their  ruin?  It  was  not  fitting  that 
such  should  themselves  enter  them  (Allah's  Masjids)  except  in 
fear.  For  them  there  is  disgrace  in  this  world,  and  they  will 
have  a  great  torment  in  the  Hereafter.} 


Of  the  Most  Unjust  are  Those  Who  prevent  People  from 
the  Masjids  and  strive  for  their  Ruin 


The  Quraysh  idolators  are  those  who  hindered  the  people 
from  the  Masjids  of  Allah  and  wanted  to  destroy  them.  Ibn 
Jarir  reported  that  Ibn  Zayd  said  that  Allah’s  statement, 


j 


ILLS  Q  yi  j  if 


on 


i 


4 And  who  are  more  unjust  than  those  who  forbid  that  Allah's 
Name  be  mentioned  (i.e.  prayers  and  invocations)  in  Allah's 
Masjids  and  strive  for  their  ruin?} 

is  about  the  Quraysh  idolators  who  prevented  the  Prophet  M 
from  entering  Makkah  from  Al-Hudaybiyyah,  until  he 
slaughtered  the  Hadi  (animal  for  sacrifice)  at  Dhi-Tuwa.  He 
then  agreed  to  a  peace  treaty  with  the  idolators  and  said  to 
them,  «No  one  before  has  ever  prevented  people  from  entering  the 
House.  One  would  eveti  see  the  killer  of  his  father  and  brother,  but 
voould  not  prevent  him  (from  entering  the  House  of  Allah).*  They 
said,  “Whoever  killed  our  fathers  at  Badr,  shall  never  enter  it 
while  there  is  one  of  us  alive.”  Allah's  statement, 

ityif  j  &fj} 


iand  strive  for  their  ruin} 

means  those  who  prevent  whoever  maintain  the  Masjids  with 
Allah’s  remembrance  and  who  visit  Allah’s  House  to  perform 
Hajj  and  1 Umrah J1*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  recorded  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
said  that  the  Quraysh  prevented  the  Prophet  from  praying 
at  the  Ka'bah  in  Al-Masjid  Al-Haram,  so  Allah  revealed, 


SA  3  jtfkl  Iff} 


iAnd  who  are  more  unjust  than  those  who  forbid  that  Allah's 
Natne  be  mentioned  (i.e.  prayers  and  invocations)  in  Allah's 


m 


At-Tabari  2 :521 . 


344 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Masjids?)’*1' 

After  Allah  chastised  the  Jews  and  Christians,  He  also 
criticized  the  idolaters  who  expelled  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg 
and  his  Companions  from  Makkah,  preventing  them  from 
praying  in  Al-Masjid  Al-Haram,  which  they  kept  exclusively  for 
their  idols  and  polytheism.  Allah  said, 


m-w,  -5  &  'ji  m 


4 And  why  should  not  Allah  punish  them  while  they  hinder 
(men)  from  Al-Masjid  Al-Hardm,  and  they  are  not  its 
guardians?  None  can  be  its  guardians  except  Al-Muttaqun  (the 
pious),  but  most  of  them  know  not.)  (8:34) 


4It  is  not  for  the  Mushrikin  (polytheists),  to  maintain  the 
Masjids  of  Allah  while  they  witness  against  their  own  selves  of 
disbelief.  The  works  of  such  are  in  vain  and  in  Fire  shall  they 
abide.  The  Masjids  of  Allah  shall  be  maintained  only  by  those 
who  believe  in  Allah  and  the  Last  Day;  perform  the  Saltih,  and 
give  the  Zakdh  and  fear  none  but  Allah.  It  is  they  who  are  on 
true  guidance.)  (9:17-18) 

and, 


Vjlj  xf  (^) 

,'■<  *• r  r  't  {<•  v  •*  >i:  1  .r--. -  ;< 

aBi  >4^  ^  *v— 

4<^% J  C\m>  \JJ£  03 1^5  jSfca,*  .*£5  u 


4They  are  the  ones  who  disbelieved  and  hindered  you  from  Al- 
Masjid-Al-Haram  (at  Makkah)  and  detained  the  sacrificial 

I11  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :341 . 


345 


Saruh  2,  Al-Baqarah  (101  -  124)  (Portal) 


animals,  from  reaching  their  place  of  sacrifice.  Had  there  not 
been  believing  men  and  believing  women  whom  you  did  not 
know,  that  you  may  kill  them  and  on  whose  account  a  sin 
would  have  been  committed  by  you  witlwut  (your)  knowledge, 
that  Allah  might  bring  into  His  mercy  whom  He  wills  -  if 
they  (the  believers  and  the  disbelievers)  had  been  apart,  We 
verily,  would  have  punished  those  of  them  who  disbelieved  with 
painful  torment >  (48:25). 

Therefore,  Allah  said  here, 


jij  j— %-V*i  'j  vcT.  * 

i.'&  VI  jjc 


iThe  Masjids  of  Allah  shall  be  maintained  only  by  those  wlw 
believe  in  Alldlt  and  the  Last  Day;  perform  the  Salah,  and  give 
the  Zakdh  and  fear  none  but  Allah}. 

Therefore,  if  those  believers  who  follow  the  virtues  mentioned 
in  the  Ayah  were  prevented  from  attending  the  Masjid,  then 
what  cause  for  destruction  is  worse  than  this?  Maintaining  the 
Masjids  not  only  means  beautifying  them,  but  it  involves 
remembering  Allah,  establishing  His  Shari'ah  in  the  Masjids 
and  purifying  them  from  the  filth  of  Shirk. 


The  Good  News  that  Islam  shall  prevail 

Allah  said  next, 

i&afc  VI  of  u 

$It  was  not  fitting  that  such  should  themselves  enter  them 
(Allah's  Masjids)  except  in  fear}. 

This  Ayah  means,  “Do  not  allow  them  -  the  disbelievers  -  to 
enter  the  Masjids,  except  to  satisfy  the  terms  of  an  armistice  or 
a  treaty.”  When  the  Messenger  of  Allah  conquered  Makkah 
in  9  H,  he  commanded  that  someone  announce  at  Mina,  “After 
the  current  year,  no  idolaters  shall  perform  Hajj,  and  no  naked 
persons  shall  perform  Tawaf  around  the  House,  except  for  those 
who  have  a  treaty.  In  this  case,  the  treaty  will  be  carried  to  the 
end  of  its  term.”*1'  This  Ayah  supports  the  Ayah, 


hi 


Path  Al-Bari  3 :565 . 


346 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathir 


faz  ^  j^rJi  tfpc  *  sz  &&  <1$ 


40  you  who  believe!  (in  Allah's  Oneness  and  in  His  Messenger 
Muhammad  $g)!  Verily,  the  Mushrikun  (idolators)  are  Najasun 
(impure).  So  let  them  not  come  near  Al-Masjid-Al-Haram  (at 
Makkah)  after  this  year}  (9:28). 

It  was  also  said  that  this  Ayah  (2:114)  carries  the  good  news 
for  the  Muslims  from  Allah  that  He  will  allow  them  to  take 
over  Al-Masjid  Al-Haram  and  all  the  Masjids  and  disgrace  the 
idolators.  Soon  after,  the  Ayah  indicated,  no  idolator  shall 
enter  the  House,  except  out  of  fear  of  being  seized  or  killed, 
unless  he  embraces  Islam.  Allah  fulfilled  this  promise  and 
later  decreed  that  idolators  not  be  allowed  to  enter  Al-Masjid 
Al-Haram.  The  Messenger  of  Allah  stated  that  no  two 
religions  should  remain  in  the  Arabian  Peninsula,  and  the  Jews 
and  Christians  should  be  expelled  from  it,  all  praise  is  due  to 
Allah.  All  of  these  rulings  ensure  maintaining  the  honor  of  Al- 
Masjid  Al-Haram  and  purifying  the  area  where  Allah  sent  His 
Messenger  to  warn  and  bring  good  news  to  all  of  mankind, 
may  Allah’s  peace  and  blessings  be  on  him. 

This  Ayah  also  described  the  disgrace  that  the  disbelievers 
earn  in  this  life,  and  that  the  punishment  comes  in  a  form 
comparable  to  the  deed.  Just  as  they  prevented  the  believers 
from  entering  Al-Masjid  Al-Haramt  they  were  prevented  from 
entering  it  in  turn.  Just  as  they  expelled  the  believers  from 
Makkah,  they  were  in  turn  expelled  from  Makkah, 

t,\%  4 


iand  they  will  have  a  great  torment  in  the  Hereafter } 

because  they  breached  the  sanctity  of  the  House  and  brought 
filth  to  it  by  erecting  idols  all  around  it,  invoking  other  than 
Allah  and  performing  Tawaf  around  it  while  naked,  etc. 

Here  it  is  worth  mentioning  the  Hadith  about  seeking  refuge 
from  disgrace  in  this  life  and  the  torment  of  the  Hereafter. 
Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Busr  bin  Artah  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  used  to  supplicate, 

dill  j  IfJA  J4ili» 

«0  Allah!  Make  our  end  better  in  all  affairs,  and  save  us  from 
disgrace  in  this  life  and  the  torment  of  the  Hereafters 


347 


Surah  2.  AMiagargh  (101  -  124}  (Part-1) 


This  Hadith  is  HasanJ1' 

#*'  *Ap 


42  25 .  And  to  Allah  belong  the  east  and  the  west,  so  wherever 
you  turn  (yourselves  or  your  faces)  there  is  the  Face  of  Allah 
(and  He  is  High  above,  over  His  Throne).  Surely,  Allah  is 
Sufficient  (for  His  creatures'  needs).  Knowing .} 


Pacing  the  Qiblah  (Direction  of  the  Prayer) 


This  ruling  brought  comfort  to  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  and 
his  Companions,  who  were  driven  out  of  Makkah  and  had  to 
depart  from  the  area  of  Al-Masjid  Al-Haram.  In  Makkah,  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  sg  used  to  pray  in  the  direction  of  Bayt  Al- 
Maqdis,  while  the  Ka'bah  was  between  him  and  the  Qiblah. 
When  the  Messenger  jg  migrated  to  Al-Madlnah,  he  faced  Bayt 
Al-Maqdis  for  sixteen  or  seventeen  months,  and  then  Allah 
directed  him  to  face  Al-Ka‘bah  in  prayer.  This  is  why  Allah  said, 


Lj  £ \’)'j  %ag  &} 


iAttd  to  Allah  belong  the  east  and  the  west,  so  wherever  you 
turn  (yourselves  or  your  faces)  there  is  the  Face  of  Allah  (and 
He  is  High  above,  over  His  Throne)}. 

‘Ali  bin  Abi  Talhah  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “The  first  part 
of  the  Qur’an  that  was  abrogated  was  about  the  Qiblah.  When 
the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  migrated  to  Al-Madlnah,  which  was 
inhabited  by  the  Jews,  he  was  at  first  commanded  to  face  Bayt 
Al-Maqdis.  The  Jews  were  happy,  and  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg 
faced  Bayt  Al-Maqdis  for  some  ten  months.  However,  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  liked  to  face  the  Qiblah  of  Ibrahim  {Al- 
Ka'bah  at  Makkah),  and  he  used  to  look  to  the  sky  and 
supplicate.  So  Allah  revealed, 

4  J  4X0  CS j 


4  Verily,  We  have  seen  the  turning  of  your  (Multammad's)  face 
towards  the  heaven}  until, 


jfejfc 


***  Ahmad  4 : 18 1 . 


348 


Tgfsir  Ibn  Kathir 

itum  your  faces  (in  prayer)  in  that  direction)  (2:144). 

The  Jews  were  disturbed  by  this  development  and  said, 
“What  made  them  change  the  direction  of  the  Qiblah  that  they 
used  to  face?’  Allah  revealed, 

A  J) 


iSay  (O  Muhammad  si)  •*  "To  Allah  belong  both,  east  and  the 
west")  and, 


iSo  wherever  you  turn  (yourselves  or  your  faces)  there  is  the 
Face  of  Allah  (and  He  is  High  above,  over  His  Throne)).”11' 


'Ikrimah  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 


4 So  wherever  you  turn  (yourselves  or  your  faces)  there  is  the 
Face  of  Allah  (and  He  is  High  above,  over  His  Throne)) 

means,  “Allah’s  direction  is  wherever  you  face,  east  or  west.”*21 
Mujahid  said  that, 

4‘ii 

iSo  wherever  you  turn  (yourselves  or  your  faces)  there  is  the 
Face  of  Allah  (and  He  is  High  above,  over  His  Throne)) 

means,  “Wherever  you  may  be,  you  have  a  Qiblah  to  face, 
that  is,  Al-Ka‘bah.’m 


However,  it  was  said  that  Allah  sent  down  this  Ayah  before 
the  order  to  face  the  Ka'bah.  Ibn  Jarir  said,  “Others  said  that 
this  Ayah  was  revealed  to  the  Messenger  of  Allah  si  permitting 
the  one  praying  voluntary  prayers  to  face  wherever  they  wish  in 
the  east  or  west,  while  traveling,  when  in  fear  and  when  facing 
the  enemy.”*41  For  instance,  Ibn  *Umar  used  to  face  whatever 
direction  his  animal  was  headed  and  proclaim  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  |g  did  the  same,  explaining  the  Ayah, 


111  At-Jabari  2:527. 

121  Ibn  Abi  HStim  1 :347. 
131  Ibn  Abi  HStim  1 :345. 
|4)  At-Jabari  2:530. 


349 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (101  -  124 )  (Part-1) 


^ 


4So  wherever  you  turn  (yourselves  or  your  faces)  there  is  the 
Face  of  Allah}.’*1' 


That  Hadith  was  also  collected  by  Muslim,  At-Tirmidhi,  An- 
Nasa’i,  Ibn  Abi  Hatim,  Ibn  Marduwyah,  and  its  origin  is  in  the 
Two  Sahihs  from  Ibn  TJmar  and  ‘Amr  bin  Rabi'ah  without 
mentioning  the  Ayah J21  In  his  Sahih,  Al-Bukhari  recorded 
that  Nafi‘  said  that  whenever  Ibn  TJmar  was  asked  about  the 
prayer  during  times  of  fear,  he  used  to  describe  it  and  would 
then  say,  “When  the  sense  of  fear  is  worse  than  that,  pray 
while  standing,  or  while  riding,  whether  facing  the  Qiblah  or 
not.”  Nafi‘  then  said,  “I  think  Ibn  TJmar  mentioned  that  from 
the  Prophet  jl|.”*3*  It  was  also  said  that  the  Ayah  was  revealed 
about  those  who  are  unable  to  find  the  correct  direction  of  the 
Qiblah  in  the  dark  or  due  to  cloudy  skies  and,  thus,  prayed  in  a 
direction  other  than  the  Qiblah  by  mistake. 


The  Qiblah  for  the  People  of  Al-Madinah  is  what  is 
between  the  East  and  the  West 

In  his  Tafsir  of  this  Ayah  (2:115),  Al-Hafiz  Ibn  Marduwyah 
recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  said, 

‘J'yji  jib  filii  jib  jiV  jjlji  jl;  u» 

‘What  is  between  tlte  east  and  the  west  is  the  Qiblah  far  the 
people  of  Al-Madinah,  Ash-Sham  and  'Iraq.n'4' 

At-Tirmidhi  and  Ibn  Majah  recorded  this  Hadith  with  the 
wording, 

i— > yuJlj  t*® 

zWhat  is  between  the  east  and  the  west  is  a  Qiblah. ^ 

Ibn  Jarir  said,  “The  meaning  of  Allah's  statement; 


111  At-Tabari  2:530. 

[21  Muslim  1:486,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8:292,  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra 
1 :244,  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :344,  and  Al-Hakim  2 :266. 

131  Fath  Al-Bari  8 :46 . 

141  Al-TJqayli  4:309. 

,S1  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  2:317,  and  Ibn  Majah  1 :323 . 


350 


Tafoir  Ibn  Kathir 


ii£  &$&&& 

iSurely,  Allah  is  Sufficient  (for  His  creatures'  needs), 
Knowing } 

is  that  Allah  encompasses  all  His  Creation  by  providing  them 
with  sufficient  needs  and  by  His  generosity  and  favor.  His 
statement, 


^Knowing} 


means  He  is  knowledgeable  of  their  deeds  and  nothing  escapes 
His  watch,  nor  is  He  unaware  of  anything.  Rather,  His 
knowledge  encompasses  everything.”111 


$  y  JejV'j  4  $  $>■ 


4226.  And  they  (Jews,  Christians  and  pagans)  say:  Allah  has 
begotten  a  son  ( children  or  offspring).  Glory  is  to  Him  (Exalted 
is  He  above  all  that  they  associate  with  Him).  Nay,  to  Him 
belongs  all  that  is  in  the  heavens  and  on  earth,  and  all  are 
Qanitiin  to  Him.} 

4227.  The  Originator  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  When  He 
decrees  a  matter,  He  only  says  to  it:  "Be!"  -  and  it  is.} 


Refuting  the  Claim  that  Allah  has  begotten  a  Son 


This  and  the  following  Ayat  refute  the  Christians,  may  Allah 
curse  them,  and  their  like  among  the  Jews  and  the  Arab 
idolators,  who  claimed  that  the  angels  are  Allah’s  daughters. 
Allah  refuted  all  of  them  in  their  claim  that  He  had  begotten  a 
son.  Allah  said, 


} 


iGlory  is  to  Him.} 

meaning,  He  is  holier  and  more  perfect  than  such  claim; 

4  £  $ 

m 


At-Tabari  2  :537 . 


351 


Surah  2.  ATBagarah  (101  - 124)  (Parti) 


4Nay,  to  Him  belongs  all  that  is  in  the  heavens  and  on  earth,} 


meaning,  the  truth  is  not  as  the  disbelievers  claimed,  rather, 
Allah’s  is  the  kingdom  of  the  heavens  and  earth  and  whatever 
and  whoever  is  in,  on  and  between  them.  Allah  is  the  Supreme 
Authority  in  the  heavens  and  earth,  and  He  is  the  Creator, 
Provider  and  Sustainer  Who  decides  all  the  affairs  of  the 
creation  as  He  wills.  All  creatures  are  Allah’s  servants  and  are 
owned  by  Him.  Therefore,  how  could  one  of  them  be  His  son? 
The  son  of  any  being  is  bom  out  of  two  comparable  beings. 
Allah  has  no  equal  or  rival  sharing  His  grace  and  greatness,  so 
how  can  He  have  a  son  when  He  has  no  wife?  Allah  said, 


$i  %  &  ?  & 


%  JS  %  jd  jp  3  OyUJl  jp} 


4Hc  is  the  Originator  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth .  How  can 
He  have  children  when  He  has  no  wife ?  He  created  all  things 
and  He  is  the  Knower  of  everything}  (6:101). 


oj  fa’-i  O yhi\  l Irff'  jjcl  \3\jj} 

3  0^9}  ujj*  .  v'*4>  3pJA  jy°  ^  jCii 

oylli'  l?  o*  £>).  ..y.bb 

A .  ' pi 


4And  they  say :  " The  Most  Gracious  (Allah)  has  begotten  a  son 
(offspring  or  children)-"  Indeed  you  have  brought  forth  (said)  a 
terrible  evil  thing.  Whereby  the  heavens  are  almost  tom,  and 
the  earth  is  split  asunder,  and  the  mountains  fall  in  ruins.  Tftat 
they  ascribe  a  son  (or  offspring  or  children)  to  the  Most 
Gracious  (Allah).  But  it  is  not  suitable  for  (the  majesty  of)  the 
Most  Gracious  (Allah)  that  He  should  beget  a  son  (or  offspring 
or  children).  There  is  none  in  the  heavens  and  the  earth  but 
conies  unto  the  Most  Gracious  (Allah)  as  a  servant.  Verily,  He 
knoivs  each  one  of  them,  and  has  counted  them  a  full  counting. 
And  everyone  of  them  will  come  to  Him  alone  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection  (without  any  helper,  or  protector  or  defender)} 
(19:88-95),  and, 


352 


Tafsfr  Ibtt  Kathtr 


iSay:  "He  is  Allah  (the)  One,  Allah  the  Samad  (the  Self- 
Sufficent,  upon  whom  all  depend),  He  begets  not,  nor  was  He 
begotten,  and  there  is  none  comparable  to  Him .")  (112). 

In  these  Ayat,  Allah  stated  that  He  is  the  Supreme  Master 
Whom  there  is  no  equal  or  rival,  everything  and  everyone  was 
created  by  Him,  so  how  can  He  have  a  son  from  among  them? 
This  is  why,  in  the  Tafsir  of  this  Ayah,  Al-Bukhari  recorded 
that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  the  Prophet  jg  said, 


J  6%  & 


Ui-ij  <3  j  joT  jj!  JU» 

I  us  ilel  if  jjJf  i  J\ 

a1jJj  jl  JL>uf  jf 


u Allah  said,  'The  son  of  Adam  has  denied  Me,  and  that  is  not 
his  right.  He  has  insulted  Me,  and  that  is  not  his  right.  As  for 
the  denial  of  Me,  he  claimed  that  l  am  unable  to  bring  him  back 
as  he  used  to  be  (resurrect  him).  As  for  his  insulting  Me,  he 
claimed  that  I  have  a  son.  All  praise  is  due  to  Me,  it  is 
unbefitting  that  l  should  have  a  wife  or  a  son . '» 

This  Hadith  was  recorded  by  Al-Bukhari.* 11 
It  is  recorded  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah 
^  said, 


^  (*■*»!  •  5*»"  iff 


JL>-i 


“No  one  is  more  patient  when  hearing  an  insult  than  Allah. 
They  attribute  a  son  to  Him,  yet  He  still  gives  them  sustanence 
and  health  .»*21 


Everything  is  within  Allah’s  Grasp 

Allah  said, 

iall  are  Qanitun  to  Him). 


111  Fath  Al-Bari  8:18. 

121  Fath  Al-Bdri  13:372,  and  Muslim  4:2160. 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baaarah  (Part-1 


353 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  said  that  Abu  Said  Al-Ashaj  informed  them 
that  Asbat  informed  them  from  Mutarrif,  from  ‘Atiyah,  from 
Ibn  ‘Abbas  who  said  that, 

iQdntfn}  (2:238) 

means,  they  pray  to  Him.' 11  ‘Ikrimah  and  Abu  Malik  also  said 
that, 

&} 

iand  all  are  Qdnitun  to  Him.} 

means,  bound  to  Him  in  servitude  to  Him.’21  Said  bin  Jubayr 
said  that  Qanitun  is  sincerity.13’  Ar-Rabl*  bin  Anas  said  that, 

iail  are  Qdnitun  to  Him.} 

means,  “Standing  up  -  before  Him  -  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection.”’41  Also,  As-Suddi  said  that, 

yS  %} 

iand  all  are  Qanitun  to  Him.} 

means,  “Obedient  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection.  ”’S|  Khaslf  said 
that  Mujahid  said  that, 

}J  %} 

}and  all  are  Qdnitun  to  Him.}  means,  “Obedient.  He  says,  Be  a 
human’  and  he  becomes  a  human.”161  He  also  said,  “(Allah 
says,)  Be  a  donkey’  and  it  becomes  a  donkey.”  Also,  Ibn  Abi 
Najih  said  that  Mujahid  said  that, 

iand  all  are  Qdnitun  to  Him.} 

11 1  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :349. 

,2)  Ibid. 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:350. 

141  Ibid. 

|S|  At-Tabari  2:538. 

161  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :349. 


354 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlur 


means,  obedient.  Mujahid  also  said,  “The  obedience  of  the 
disbeliever  occurs  when  his  shadow  prostrates,  while  he  hates 
that.”11’  Mujahid’s  statement,  which  Ibn  Jarir  preferred, 
combines  all  the  meanings,  and  that  is  that  Qunut  means 
obedience  and  submission  to  Allah.  There  are  two  categories  of 
Qunut  legislated  and  destined,  for  Allah  said, 


iAnd  unto  Allah  (alone)  falls  in  prostration  whoever  is  in  the 
heavens  and  the  earth,  willingly  or  unwillingly,  and  so  do  their 
shadows  in  the  mornings  and  in  the  (late)  afternoons }  (13:15). 


The  Meaning  of  BadV 

Allah  said, 

iThe  Bad x  ( Originator )  of  the  heavens  and  the  earthy 

which  means,  He  created  them  when  nothing  resembling  them 
existed.  Mujahid  and  As-Suddi  said  that  this  is  the  linguistic 
meaning,  for  all  new  matters  are  called  Bid' ah.  Muslim 
recorded  the  Messenger  of  Allah  ^  saying, 

+ , .  ,  p  t  >  *  ' 

J5 

“ . .  .every  innovation  (in  religion)  is  a  Bid1  ah . » 

There  are  two  types  of  Bid‘ah,  religious,  as  mentioned  in  the 
Hadith: 

itjj  JSj  ipjj  J S 

•  ...every  innovation  is  a  Bid' ah  and  every  Bid1  ah  is  heresy. 

And  there  is  a  linguistic  Bid'ah,  such  as  the  statement  of  the 
Leader  of  the  faithful  ‘Umar  bin  Al-Khattab  when  he  gathered 
the  Muslims  to  pray  the  Tarawth  prayer  in  congregation 
(which  was  also  an  earlier  practice  of  the  Prophet  jfe)  and  said, 
“What  a  good  Bid'ah  this  is.” 

Ibn  Jarir  said,  “Thus  the  meaning  of  the  Ayat  (2:116-117) 
becomes,  ‘Allah  is  far  more  glorious  than  to  have  had  a  son, 


111  Ibn  AbiHatim  1:348. 
|2>  Muslim  2:592. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (101  - 124}  (Part-1) 


355 


for  He  is  the  Owner  of  everything  that  is  in  the  heavens  and 
earth.  All  testify  to  His  Oneness  and  to  their  submissiveness  to 
Him.  He  is  their  Creator  and  Maker.  Without  created 
precedence,  He  shaped  the  creatures  in  their  current  shapes. 
Allah  also  bears  witness  to  His  servants  that  Jesus,  who  some 
claimed  to  be  Allah’s  son,  is  among  those  who  testify  to  His 
Oneness.  Allah  stated  that  He  created  the  heavens  and  earth 
out  of  nothing  and  without  precedent.  Likewise,  He  created 
Jesus,  the  Messiah,  with  His  power  and  without  a  father.”111 
This  explanation  from  Ibn  Jarir,  may  Allah  have  mercy  upon 
him,  is  very  good  and  correct. 

Allah  said, 


im  $  $  &  <4  &  & 


iWhen  He  decrees  a  matter,  He  only  says  to  it  :  "Be!”  -  and 
it  is.} 


thus,  demonstrating  His  perfectly  complete  ability  and 
tremendous  authority;  if  He  decides  a  matter,  He  merely 
orders  it  to,  ‘Be’  and  it  comes  into  existence.  Similarly,  Allah 
said, 


£  %  j>:  J  ££  4  Til  U\} 


iVerily,  His  command,  when  He  intends  a  thing,  is  only  that 
He  says  to  it,  "Be!”  -  and  it  is.}  (36:82), 


4  v j i>j>4  S  <5  4  J  'Jy  ^\} 


iVerily,  Our  Word  unto  a  thing  when  We  intend  it,  is  only 
that  We  say  unto  it:  “Be!"  -  and  it  is.}  (16:40)  and, 


iAnd  Our  commandment  is  but  one  as  the  twinkling  of  an  eye} 
(54:50) 


So  Allah  informed  us  that  He  created  Jesus  by  merely 
saying,  “Be!”  and  he  was,  as  Allah  willed: 


iVerily,  the  likeness  of ‘Isa  (Jesus)  before  Allah  is  the  likeness  of 


li] 


At-Tabari  2  :550. 


Adam.  He  created  him  from  dust,  then  (He)  said  to  him:  ", Be l" 
-  and  he  was }  (3:59). 


JVi  dx#  hi  \SJj  •}  &  -if,  V  csjl  fa} 


4115.  And  f/iose  who  have  no  knowledge  say:  "Why  does  not 
Allah  speak  to  us  (face  to  face)  or  why  does  not  a  sign  come  to 
us?”  So  said  the  people  before  them  words  of  similar  import. 
Their  hearts  are  alike,  We  have  indeed  made  plain  the  signs  for 
people  who  believe  with  certainty.} 

Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that 
Rafi‘  bin  Huraymilah  said  to  the  Messenger  of  Allah  m,  “O 
Muhammad)  If  you  were  truly  a  Messenger  from  Allah,  as  you 
claim,  then  ask  Allah  to  speak  to  us  directly,  so  that  we  hear 


His  Speech.”  So  Allah  revealed, 


j\  d2&  'if  bJJZ  v  $3 


$And  those  wlw  have  no  knowledge  say:  "Why  does  not  Allah 
speak  to  us  (face  to  face)  or  why  does  not  a  sign  come  to 
msP'V1* 

Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Ar-Rabi*  bin  Anas,  Qatadah  and  As-Suddi 
said  that  it  was  actually  the  statement  of  the  Arab 
disbelievers: 

ot  4&} 


}So  said  the  people  before  them  words  of  similar  import.} 

He  said,  “These  are  the  Jews  and  the  Christians.”*2* 

What  further  proves  that  the  Arab  idolators  said  the 
statement  mentioned  in  the  Ayah  is  that  Allah  said, 


vi_».  ■Jill  4a\  (if  H  jJa  jy  f  ijlli  \lf} 

C,  rixl  idis  &  1*  i^JJS  ^  4^ 


4 And  when  there  comes  to  them  a  sign  (from  Alldlt)  they  say : 
"We  shall  not  believe  until  we  receive  the  like  of  that  which  the 


*l*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :352. 
*2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :353 . 


357 


Surah  2.  Al-Bagaralt  (101  -  124}  (Parti} 


Messengers  of  Allah  had  received.”  Allah  knows  best  with 
whom  to  place  His  Message.  Humiliation  and  disgrace  from 
Allah  and  a  severe  torment  will  overtake  the  criminals 
(polytheists  and  sinners)  for  that  which  they  used  to  plot.} 
(6:124)  and 


u Ot  U  Jyv  si*-  ^ 


4 And  they  say:  "We  shall  not  believe  in  you  (O  Muhammad 
s&),  until  you  cause  a  spring  to  gush  forth  from  the  earth  for 
us}  until, 


ft  jf) 


4Say  (O  Mulmmmad  %*) :  "Glorified  (and  Exalted)  be  my  Lord 
[(Allah)  above  all  that  evil  they  (polytheists)  associate  with 
Hint]!  Am  I  anything  but  a  man,  sent  as  a  Messenger?"} 
(17:90-93)  and, 


J  if  Hi  '4  vj)  uui  ^  v  IM 


4And  those  who  expect  not  a  meeting  with  Us  (i.e.  those  who 
deny  the  Day  of  Resurrection  and  the  life  of  the  Hereafter)  said : 
" Why  are  not  the  angels  sent  down  to  us,  or  why  do  we  not  see 
our  Lord?"}  (25:21)  and, 


/  ts  >  > 


p rH  -V/ 


4Nay,  everyone  of  than  desires  that  he  should  be  given  pages 
spread  oufy  (74:52). 


There  are  many  other  Ayat  that  testify  to  the  disbelief  of  the 
Arab  idolators,  their  transgression,  stubbornness,  and  that 
they  asked  unnecessary  questions  out  of  disbelief  and 
arrogance.  The  statements  of  the  Arab  idolators  followed  the 
statements  of  the  nations  of  the  People  of  the  Two  Scriptures 
and  other  religions  before  them.  Allah  said, 


Oi  &  &P  Ijfc  &  Se  OsT  3$  J 


4 


4The  People  of  the  Scripture  (Jews)  ask  you  to  cause  a  book  to 
descend  upon  them  from  heaven.  Indeed,  they  asked  Musa 
(Moses)  for  even  greater  than  that,  when  they  said:  ", Show  us 


m 


Tfl/sfr  Ibn  Kathir 


Allah  in  public ,”)  (4:153)  and, 


4  *.>-**•  ■u>'  *Sj  &•  osj*  J  Ls“y*i  .3*  ■»)_>? 


(remember)  when  you  said:  "O  Musa!  We  shall  never 
believe  in  you  until  we  see  Allah  plainly.”)  (2:55). 

Allah’s  statement, 


iTheir  hearts  are  alike.) 


means,  the  hearts  of  the  Arab  idolators  are  just  like  the  hearts 
of  those  before  them,  containing  disbelief,  stubbornness  and 
injustice.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


4-^j  ^1  Jj-y  O'  oj  0$  1$  C  •$£) 


4 Likewise ,  no  Messenger  came  to  those  before  them  but  they 
said:  “A  sorcerer  or  a  madman!”  Have  they  (the  people  of  the 
past)  transmitted  this  saying  to  these  (Quraysh  pagans)?) 
(51:52-53). 

Allah  said  next, 

&P.  -2^ 


4We  have  indeed  made  plain  the  signs  for  people  who  believe 
with  certainty.) 


meaning,  We  made  the  arguments  clear,  prooving  the  truth  of 
the  Messengers,  with  no  need  of  more  questions  or  proofs  for 
those  who  believe,  follow  the  Messengers  and  comprehend 
what  Allah  sent  them  with.  As  for  those  whose  hearts  and 
hearing  Allah  has  stamped  and  whose  eyes  have  been  sealed, 
Allah  described  them: 


iTruly,  those,  against  whom  the  Word  (wrath)  of  your  Lord 
has  been  justified,  will  not  believe.  Even  if  every  sign  should 
come  to  them,  until  they  see  the  painful  torment)  (10:96-97). 


4119.  Verily,  We  have  sent  you  (O  Muhammad  jfe)  with  the 


truth  (Islam),  a  bringer  of  glad  tidings  (for  those  who  believe  in 
what  you  brought,  that  they  will  enter  Paradise)  and  a  wamer 
(for  those  who  disbelieve  in  what  you  brought,  that  they  will 
enter  the  Hellfire).  And  you  will  not  be  asked  about  the  dwellers 
of  the  blazing  Fire.} 

Allah’s  statement; 

iAnd  you  will  not  be  asked  about  the  dwellers  of  the  blazing 
Fire.} 

means,  “We  shall  not  ask  you  about  the  disbelief  of  those  who 
rejected  you.”  Similarly,  Allah  said, 

j$JT  til} 

iYour  duty  is  only  to  convey  (the  Message)  and  on  Us  is  the 
reckoning.}  (13:40) 


iSo  remind  them  (O  Muhammad  jg)  -  you  are  only  one  who 
reminds.  You  are  not  a  dictator  over  them. ^(88:2 1-22)  and, 


Tv. 


}\Nc  knmo  best  luhat  they  say.  And  you  (O  Muhammad  zg)  are 
not  the  one  to  force  them  (to  belief).  But  warn  by  the  Qur'an ; 
him  who  fears  My  threat}  (50:45). 


There  are  many  other  similar  Ayat . 


The  Description  of  the  Prophet  #,  in  the  Tawrah 

Imam  Ahmad  recorded  ‘Ata’  bin  Yasar  saying  that  he  met 
‘Abdullah  bin  ‘Amr  bin  A1-‘As  and  said  to  him,  “Tell  me  about 
the  description  of  the  Messenger  of  Allah  in  the  Torah.”  He 
said,  “Yes,  by  Allah,  he  is  described  by  the  Torah  with  the  same 
characteristics  that  he  is  described  with  in  the  Qur’an  with:  ‘O 
Prophet!  We  have  sent  you  as  a  witness,  a  bringer  of  good 
news,  a  wamer,  and  as  safe  refuge  for  the  unlettered  people. 
You  are  My  servant  and  Messenger.  I  have  called  you  the 
Mutawakkil  (who  depends  and  relies  on  Allah  for  each  and 
everything).  You  are  not  harsh,  nor  hard,  nor  obnoxious  in  the 
bazaars.  He  does  not  reward  the  evil  deed  with  an  evil  deed. 


360 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Rather,  he  forgives  and  pardons.  Allah  will  not  bring  his  life  to 
an  end,  until  he  straightens  the  wicked’s  religion  by  his  hands 
so  that  the  people  proclaim:  There  is  no  deity  worthy  of  worship 
except  Allah.  By  his  hands,  Allah  will  open  blind  eyes,  deaf  ears 
and  sealed  hearts.’”*11  This  was  recorded  by  Al-Bukhari 
only.'2* 


Cs'MS  y>  <jjf  i  (Z >i  J»  JLt  Jj) 

r^1*  <-£^*  jj  Jit 

^  f/y  .4j  £s£jf 


4120.  Never  will  the  Jews  nor  the  Christians  be  pleased  with 
you  (O  Multammad  jfej  till  you  follow  their  religion.  Say: 
“ Verily ,  the  guidance  of  Allalt  (i.e.  Islamic  Monotheism)  that  is 
the  (only)  guidance.  And  if  you  (O  Multammad  jg)  were  to 
follow  their  (Jews  and  Christians)  desires  after  what  you  have 
received  of  Knowledge  (i.e.  the  Qur'an),  then  you  would  have 
against  Allalt  neither  any  Walt  (protector  or  guardian)  nor  any 
helper.) 

4121 .  Those  to  whom  we  gave  the  Book  recite  it  as  it  should  be 
recited  (Yatlunaltu  Haqqa  Tildwatihi)  they  are  the  ones  who 
believe  therein.  And  whoso  disbelieve  in  it,  those  are  they  who 
are  the  losers .) 


Ibn  Jarir  said,  “Allah  said, 


4r&  '(£  <5*-  V*  if  ifmj  Jj) 


4Never  will  the  Jews  nor  the  Christians  be  pleased  with  you  (O 
Multammad  jg)  till  you  follow  their  religion.) 

meaning,  The  Jews  and  the  Christians  will  never  be  happy 
with  you,  O  Muhammad!  Therefore,  do  not  seek  what  pleases 
or  appeases  them,  and  stick  to  what  pleases  Allah  by  calling 
them  to  the  truth  that  Allah  sent  you  with.’  Allah’s  statement, 

4kti\  2  &  &  $) 


4Say:  "Verily,  the  guidance  of  Allah  (i.e.  Islamic  Monotheism) 
that  is  the  (only)  guidance") 


m  Ahmad  2:174. 

•2|  Fath  Al-Bari  4 :402 ,  8 :449 ,  and  Al-Adab  Al-Mufrad  72 . 


361 


Surah  2.  AlSgqarah  (101  - 124)  (Parti) 


means,  ‘Say,  O 
Muhammad  jg,  the 
guidance  of  Allah  that 
He  sent  me  with  is  the 
true  guidance, 
meaning  the  straight, 
perfect  and 
comprehensive 
religion.’  Qatadah 
said  that  Allah’s 
statement, 

ijjjt  (L>\ 

iSay:  "Verily,  the 

guidance  of  Allah  (i.e. 
Islamic  Monotheism)  that 
is  the  (only)  guidance} 
is,  “A  true  argument 
that  Allah  taught 
Muhammad  and 

his  Companions  and 
which  they  used 
against  the  people  of 
misguidance .  ”121 
Qatadah  said,  “We 
were  told  that  the 


J 


\  S 


;jl6 


'  Is?-*}  ^ 

^J==0\j 


Messenger  of  Allah  jte  used  to  say, 

Ji>-  jr*  ^  jjj)  ,_,!«•  Jjlj&  ^  J'y  'J* 

« <ii)1  y»\ 


’‘There  will  always  be  a  group  of  my  Ummah  fighting  upon  the 
truth,  having  the  upper  hand,  not  harmed  by  their  opponents, 
until  the  decree  of  Allah  (the  Last  Hour)  comes.  »,3) 

This  Hadith  was  collected  in  the  Sahih  and  narrated  from 
Abdullah  bin  Amr.*4' 

1,1  At-Tabari  2:562. 

*2'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :356 . 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :355. 

*4*  Muslim  1924. 


362 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 


/  ✓ 


iAnd  if  you  (O  Muhammad  were  to  follow  their  (Jews  and 
Christians)  desires  after  what  you  have  received  of  Knowledge 
(i.e.  the  Qur'an),  then  you  would  have  against  Allah  neither 
any  Walt  (protector  or  guardian)  nor  any  helper 

This  Ayah  carries  a  stem  warning  for  the  Muslim  Ummah 
against  imitating  the  ways  and  methods  of  the  Jews  and 
Christians,  after  they  have  acquired  knowledge  of  the  Qur’an 
and  Sunnah,  may  Allah  grant  us  refuge  from  this  behavior. 
Although  the  speech  in  this  Ayah  was  directed  at  the 
Messenger  sg,  the  ruling  of  which  applies  to  his  entire  Ummah. 


The  Meaning  of  Correct  Tilawah 

Allah  said, 

i^sk  > 

iThose  to  whom  We  gave  the  Book.  Yatluna.hu  Haqqan 
Tilawatih.} 

‘Abdur-Razzaq  said  ag  from  Ma'mar,  from  Qatadah,  “They  are 
the  Jews  and  Christians.”  This  is  the  opinion  of  ‘Abdur- 
Rahman  bin  Zayd  bin  Aslam,  and  it  was  also  chosen  by  Ibn 
Jarir.  Said  reported  from  Qatadah,  “They  are  the  Companions 
of  the  Messenger  of  Allah  sfe.”  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  said  that  Ibn 
Mas*ud  said,  “By  He  in  Whose  Hand  is  my  soul!  The  right 
Tilawah  is  allowing  what  it  makes  lawful,  prohibiting  what  it 
makes  unlawful,  reciting  it  as  it  was  revealed  by  Allah,  not 
changing  the  words  from  their  places,  and  not  interpreting  it 
with  other  than  its  actual  interpretation.”  *’*  As-Suddi  reported 
from  Abu  Malik  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas  who  said  about  this  Ayah 
(2:121):  “They  make  lawful  what  it  allows  and  they  prohibit 
what  it  makes  unlawful,  and  they  do  not  alter  its  wordings.”*2* 
Umar  bin  Al-Khattab  said,  “They  are  those  who  when  they 
recite  an  Ayah  that  mentions  mercy,  they  ask  Allah  for  it,  and 
when  they  recite  an  Ayah  that  mentions  torment,  they  seek 
refuge  with  Allah  from  it.”*3*  This  meaning  was  attributed  to 


1,1  Aj-Tabari  2:567. 
121  At-Jabari  2:567. 
*3*  Al-Qurtubi  2 :95 . 


363 


Surah  2.  AUBaqarah  (101  -  124)  (Part-1) 

the  Prophet  for  when  he  used  to  recite  an  Ayah  of  mercy,  he 
invoked  Allah  for  mercy,  and  when  he  recited  an  Ayah  of 
torment,  he  sought  refuge  from  it  with  Allah.111 
Allah’s  statement, 


ithey  are  the  ones  who  believe  therein} 
explains  the  Ayah , 


pgx  sj'> 


iThose  to  whom  We  gave  the  Book.  Yatlumhu  Haqqa 
Tildwatihi}. 


These  Ayat  mean,  “Those  among  the  People  of  the  Book  who 
perfectly  adhered  to  the  Books  that  were  revealed  to  the 
previous  Prophets,  will  believe  in  what  I  have  sent  you  with,  O 
Muhammad!”  Allah  said  in  another  Ayah, 


if  only  they  had  acted  according  to  the  Tawrah,  the  Injil, 
and  what  has  (new)  been  sent  down  to  them  from  their  Lord 
(the  Qur'an),  they  ivould  surely,  have  gotten  provision  from 
above  them  and  from  underneath  their  feet.}  (5:66).  The  Ayah, 


<•&> 


iSay  (O  Muhammad  "O  People  of  the  Scripture  (Jews  and 
Christians)!  You  have  nothing  (as  regards  guidance)  till  you  act 
according  to  the  Tawrah,  the  Injil,  and  what  has  (now)  been 
setit  down  to  you  from  your  Lord  (the  Qur'an)."} 

means,  “If  you  adhere  to  the  Torah  and  the  Gospel  in  the 
correct  manner,  believe  in  them  as  you  should,  and  believe  in 
the  news  they  carry  about  Muhammad’s  prophethood,  his 
description  and  the  command  to  follow,  aid  and  support  him, 
then  this  will  direct  you  to  adhere  to  truth  and  righteousness 
in  this  life  and  the  Hereafter.”  In  another  Ayah,  Allah  said, 


111  Ibn  Majah  429 . 


364 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathfr 


4  && 


*  *  S' 


IS* 


iThose  who  folloio  the  Messenger,  the  Prophet  who  can  neither 
read  nor  write  (i.e.  Muhammad  jg)  whom  they  find  written 
with  them  in  the  Tawrah  and  the  Injit  (7:157)  and, 


oiiiVi  ox£  Crt  pi*^ 


Tv7  "  W-V  ^  757  * 

1  *  T'"T  /#<  *  /  /.>  ^  •?  4  > 

Wj  -ifj  a*  ^>>v— • 


4Sai/  (O  Muhammad  jfe  fo  them):  “ Believe  in  it  (the  Qur’an) 
or  do  not  believe  (in  it).  Verily,  those  who  were  given 
knowledge  before  it,  when  it  is  recited  to  them,  fall  down  on 
their  faces  in  humble  prostration.  And  they  say:  “Glory  be  to 
our  Lord!  Truly,  the  promise  of  our  Lord  must  be  fulfilled 
(17:107-108). 


These  Ayat  indicate  that  what  Allah  promised  for 
Muhammad  ag  will  certainly  occur.  Allah  also  said, 


ijS  ■‘'l  »#t  pr?6  ■‘f-.ojib  •%  pi  S 

AS — lt>w>  U  CNy*  ^  &  Cl  Lj 


>  LLy  A*J  .jl 


iThose  to  whom  We  gave  the  Scripture  (i.e.  the  Tazvrah  and 
the  Itijil)  before  it,  they  believe  in  it  (the  Qur'an).  And  when  it 
is  recited  to  them,  they  say:  “We  believe  in  it.  Verily,  it  is  the 
truth  from  our  Lord.  Indeed  even  before  it  we  have  been  from 
those  who  submit  themselves  to  Allah  in  Islam  as  Muslims. 
These  will  be  given  their  reward  hoice  over,  because  they  are 
patient,  and  repel  evil  with  good,  and  spend  (in  charity)  out  of 
what  We  have  provided  them .)  (28:52-54)  and, 


Ajb  iyJL-f  jji  j. -li-U  547t^l>  J 

,  A  . 


t'  '  »;f'  W  <i-fr 


iAtid  say  to  those  who  were  given  tlw  Scripture  (Jews  and 
Christians)  and  to  those  who  are  illiterates  (Arab  pagans) :  “Do 
you  (also)  submit  yourselves  (to  Allah  in  Islam)?"  If  they  do, 
they  are  rightly  guided;  but  if  they  turn  away,  your  duty  is 
only  to  convey  the  Message;  and  Allalt  is  the  Seer  of  (His) 


365 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (101  -  124}  (Parti} 


servants}  (3:20). 

Allah  said, 

^  ‘A  j&i  i/f} 


}And  whoever  disbelieves  in  it  (the  Qur'an),  those  are  they  who 
are  the  losers},  just  as  He  said  in  another  Ayah, 


3% 


}But  those  of  the  sects  (Jews,  Christians  and  all  the  other  non- 
Muslim  nations)  that  reject  it  (the  Qur'an),  the  Fire  will  be 
their  promised  meeting  place}  (11:17). 


As  recorded  in  the  Sahih,  the  Prophet  jfe  said, 

p  V J  (Sijii  *4*  i  i-h. 

V!  ^ 


“By  He  in  Wlwse  Hand  is  my  soul!  There  is  no  member  of  this 
Ummah  (mankind  and  Jinns),  Jew  or  a  Christian,  who  hears  of 
me,  yet  does  not  believe  in  me,  but  will  enter  the  Fire. s'11 


"5?  ftj  ^  jjj  ■  ~  *-  A  jjli  ii&’l  X&i¥ 

(>*  y>  *Aii  y>  jj*  ft  ^  ^ 


4122.  O  Children  of  Israel!  Remember  My  favor  which  I 
bestowed  upon  you  and  that  I  preferred  you  over  the  nations).} 

4123.  And  fear  the  Day  (of  Judgement)  when  no  person  shall 
avail  another,  nor  shall  compensation  be  accepted  from  him,  nor 
shall  intercession  be  of  use  to  him,  nor  shall  they  be  helped.} 

We  mentioned  a  similar  Ayah  at  the  beginning  of  this  Surah, 
and  it  is  mentioned  here  to  emphisize  the  importance  of 
following  the  Ummi  Prophet  and  Messenger,  who  is  described 
for  the  People  of  the  Scriptures  in  their  Books  by  his 
characteristics,  name,  the  good  news  about  him  and  the 
description  of  his  Ummah.  Allah  warned  them  against 
concealing  this  information,  which  is  among  the  favors  that 
Allah  granted  them.  Allah  also  commanded  them  to  remember 
their  daily  life  and  their  religious  affairs  and  how  He  blessed 


Muslim  1 :134. 


366 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


them.  They  should  not  envy  their  cousins,  the  Arabs,  for  what 
Allah  has  given  them,  the  Final  Messenger  of  Allah  being  an 
Arab.  Envy  should  not  incite  them  to  oppose  or  deny  the 
Prophet  or  refrain  from  following  him,  may  Allah’s  peace  and 
blessings  be  upon  him  until  the  Day  of  Judgment. 


Ju  3$  ou  Jtf  usiSi  &&  & 


iH’ 


il24.  And  (remember)  when  the  Lord  of  Ibrahim  (Abraham) 
tried  him  with  (certain)  commands,  which  he  fulfilled.  He 
(Allah)  said  (to  him),  "Verily,  I  am  going  to  make  you  an 
Imam  (a  leader)  for  mankind  (to  follmo  you).”  (Ibrahim)  said, 
"And  of  my  offspring  (to  make  leaders)."  (Allah)  said,  "My 
covenant  (prophethood)  includes  not  Zalimin  (polytheists  and 
wrongdoers) . 


Ibrahim  Al-Khalfl  was  an  Imam  for  the  People 

Allah  is  informing  us  of  the  honor  of  Ibrahim  Al-Khalil,  who 
He  made  an  Imam  for  the  people,  and  a  model  to  be  imitated, 
because  of  the  way  he  conducted  himself  and  adhered  to 
Tawhid.  This  honor  was  given  to  Prophet  Ibrahim  when  he 
adhered  to  Allah’s  decisions  and  prohibitions.  This  is  why 
Allah  said, 

iAtid  (remember)  when  the  Lord  of  Ibrahim  (i.e.,  Allah)  tried 
him  with  (certain)  commands 

This  Ayah  means,  O  Muhammad!  Remind  the  idolaters  and 
the  People  of  the  Scriptures,  who  pretend  to  be  followers  of  the 
religion  of  Ibrahim,  while  in  reality  they  do  not  follow  it,  while 
you,  O  Muhammad,  and  your  followers  are  the  true  followers 
of  his  religion;  remind  them  of  the  commands  and  prohibitions 
that  Allah  tested  Ibrahim  with. 


iwhich  he  fulfilled. $ 

indicating  that  Ibrahim  implemented  all  of  Allah’s  orders.  Allah 
said  in  another  Ayah, 


367 


Sura/i  2.  Al-Baqarah  (101  -  124 )  (Part-1) 


iAttd  of  Ibrahim  (Abraham)  who  fulfilled  (or  conveyed)  all  that 
(Allah  ordered  him  to  do  or  convey )}  (53:37) 


meaning,  he  was  truthful  and  he  was  obedient  to  Allah’s 
legislation.  Also,  Allah  said, 


p  'J  ijfji  s.  %  hz  0n  4  4 


4  Verily,  Ibrahim  was  an  Ummah  (or  a  nation),  obedient  to 
Allah,  Hanif  (i.e.  to  worship  none  but  Allah),  and  he  was  not 
one  of  those  who  were  Al-Mushrikin  (polytheists),  (He  was) 
thankful  for  His  (Allah’s)  favors.  He  (Allah)  chose  him  and 
guided  him  to  a  straight  path.  And  We  gave  him  good  in  this 
world,  and  in  the  Hereafter  he  shall  be  of  the  righteous.  Then, 
We  have  sent  the  revelation  to  you  (O  Muhammad  jg  saying) : 
"Follow  the  religion  of  Ibrahim  Hanif  (Islamic  Monotheism  - 
to  worship  none  but  Allah)  and  he  was  not  of  the  Mushrikin 
(16:120-123) 


Iri  l*j  JV*  Uli  t,>  j.i:..:  J r'j*»  J)  tifu*  igA 

i  '  s'  r>;r 


iSay  (O  Muhammad  jg) :  “Truly,  my  Lord  has  guided  me  to  a 
straight  path,  a  right  religion,  the  religion  of  Ibrdhim,  Hanifan, 
and  Ibrdhim  (to  worship  none  but  Allah,  alone)  and  he  was  not 
of  Al-Mushrikin (6:161)  and, 


i Ibrdhim  was  neither  a  Jew  nor  a  Christian,  but  he  was  a  true 
Muslim  Hanifan  (Islamic  Monotheism  -  to  worship  none  but 
Allah  alone)  and  he  was  not  of  Al-Mushrikin.  Verily,  among 
mankind  who  have  the  best  claim  to  Ibrdliim  are  those  who 
followed  him,  and  this  Prophet  (Muhammad  sg)  and  those  who 
have  believed  (Muslims).  And  Allah  is  the  Wali  (Protector  and 
Helper)  of  the  believers ^  (3:67-68). 

Allah  said, 


<T$i* 


368 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathtr 


iwith  Kalimdt  (words)} 


which  means,  “Laws,  commandments  and  prohibitions.” 
“Words’  as  mentioned  here,  sometimes  refers  to  what  Allah  has 
willed,  such  as  Allah’s  statement  about  Maryam, 


ijcp&i  Qj  oiJL C>j} 


iAnd  site  testified  to  the  truth  of  the  Words  of  her  Lord,  and 
(also  believed  in)  His  Scriptures,  and  she  was  of  the  Qdnitfn 
(i.e.  obedient  to  Allah)}  (66:12). 

“Words”  also  refers  to  Allah’s  Law,  such  as  Allah’s  statement. 


iAnd  the  Word  of  your  Lord  has  been  fulfilled  in  truth  and  in 
justice}  (6:1 15) 


meaning,  His  legislation.  “Words”  also  means  truthful  news,  or 
a  just  commandment  or  prohibition.  For  instance,  Allah  said, 


Ai  ^  ^  ^ 

)Ij} 


iAnd  (remember)  whett  the  Lord  of  Ibrdhtm  tried  him  with 
(certain)  Words  (commands),  which  he  fulfilled} 

meaning,  he  adhered  to  them,  Allah  said, 

i&c\  zUc  4^ 


i”Verily,  I  am  going  to  make  you  an  Imam  (a  leader)  for 
mankind  (to  follmo  you).”} 

as  a  reward  for  Ibrahim’s  good  deeds,  adhering  to  the 
commandments  and  avoiding  the  prohibitions.  This  is  why 
Allah  made  Ibrahim  a  role  model  for  the  people,  and  an  Imam 
whose  conduct  and  path  are  imitated  and  followed. 


What  were  the  Words  that  Ibrahim  was  tested  with? 

There  is  a  difference  of  opinion  over  the  words  that  Allah 
tested  Ibrahim  with.  There  are  several  opinions  attributed  to 
Ibn  ‘Abbas.  For  instance,  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  said  that  Ibn  “Abbas 
said,  “Allah  tested  him  with  the  rituals  (of  Abu  Ishaq 

reported  the  same J2'  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  also  narrated  that  Ibn 


m  At-Jabari  3:13. 
121  Ibid. 


369 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (101  -  124)  (Parti} 


‘Abbas  said  that, 


4A;irf  (remember)  when  the  Lord  of  Ibrahim  (Abraham)  (i.e., 
Allah)  tried  him  with  (certain)  commands $ 


means,  “Allah  tested  him  with  Taharah  (purity,  ablution):  five 
on  the  head  and  five  on  the  body.  As  for  the  head,  they  are 
cutting  the  mustache,  rinsing  the  mouth,  inhaling  and 
discarding  water,  using  Siwak  and  parting  the  hair.  As  for  the 
body,  they  are  trimming  the  nails,  shaving  the  pubic  hair, 
circumcision  and  plucking  under  the  arm  and  washing  with 
water  after  answering  the  call  of  nature.”11'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim 
said,  “A  similar  statement  was  also  reported  from  Said  bin  Al- 
Musayyib,  Mujahid,  Ash-Shaln,  An-Nakhal,  Abu  Salih,  Abu 
Al-Jald,  and  so  forth.”'2' 

There  is  a  similar  statement  that  Imam  Muslim  narrated 
from  ‘A’ishah  who  said  that  Allah’s  Messenger  said, 


ajj  (-ini  (jl.t.’T.’-ij 
j  frUJl 

jl  j jSJ  ji 


« Ten  are  among  the  Fitrah  (instinct,  natural  constitution): 
trimming  the  mustache,  growing  the  beard,  using  Siwak, 
inhaling  and  then  exhaling  water  (in  ablution),  cutting  the 
nails,  washing  between  the  fingers  (in  ablution),  plucking  the 
underarm  hair,  shaving  the  pubic  hair,  washing  with  water 
after  answering  the  call  of  nature,  (and  I  forgot  the  tenth,  I 
think  it  was)  rinsing  the  mouth  (in  ablution)  .»'3' 

The  Two  Sahihs  recorded  Abu  Hurayrah  saying  that  the 
Prophet  sg  said, 


« Five  are  among  the  acts  of  Fitrah:  circumcision,  shaving  the 
pubic  hair,  trimming  the  mustache,  cutting  the  nails  and 
plucking  the  underarm  hairJ  This  is  the  wording  with 


‘Abdur-Razzaq  1 :57. 
121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :359. 
'3)  Muslim  1:223. 


370 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kgthtr 


Muslim.*11 

Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  reportd  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “The 
words  that  Allah  tested  Ibrahim  with,  and  that  he 
implemented  were:  abandoning  his  (disbelieving)  people  when 
Allah  commanded  him  to  do  so,  disputing  with  Nimrod  (king  of 
Babylon)  about  Allah,  being  patient  when  he  was  thrown  in 
the  fire  (although  this  was  extremely  traumatic)  migrating  from 
his  homeland  when  Allah  commanded  him  to  do  so,  patience 
with  the  monetary  and  material  demands  of  hosting  guests  by 
Allah’s  command,  and  Allah’s  order  for  him  to  slaughter  his 
son.  When  Allah  tested  Ibrahim  with  these  words,  and  he  was 
ready  for  the  major  test,  Allah  said  to  him, 

0,  m  ft 

4" Submit  (be  a  Muslim)!”  He  said,  "I  have  submitted  myself 
(as  a  Muslim)  to  the  Lord  of  all  that  exists.”}  (2:131) 

although  this  meant  defying  and  being  apart  from  the 
people.”*2* 

The  Unjust  do  not  qualify  for  Allah's  Promise 

Allah  said  that  Ibrahim  said, 

4 And  of  my  offspring  (to  make  leaders)}  and  Allah  replied, 

Sc  -3} 

4My  covenant  (prophethood)  includes  not  Zdlimin  (polytheists 
and  wrongdoers)}. 

When  Allah  made  Ibrahim  an  Imam  (Leader  for  the  faithful), 
he  asked  Allah  that  Imams  thereafter  be  chosen  from  his 
offspring.  Allah  accepted  his  supplication,  but  told  him  that 
there  will  be  unjust  people  among  his  offspring  and  they  will 
not  benefit  from  Allah’s  promise.  Thus,  they  will  neither 
become  Imams  nor  be  imitated  (for  they  will  not  be  righteous). 
The  proof  that  Ibrahim’s  supplication  to  Allah  was  accepted  is 
that  Allah  said  in  Surat  Al-‘Ankabut  (29:27), 

***  FathAl-Bari  10:347  and  Muslim  1 :222. 

|2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :360. 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqaralt  ( 101  -  124)  (Part-1) 


371 


4  And  Wr  ordained  among  his  offspring  prophethood  and  the 
Book >. 

Hence,  every  Prophet  whom  Allah  sent  after  Ibrahim  were 
from  among  his  offspring,  and  every  Book  that  Allah  revealed 
was  to  them.  As  for  Allah's  statement, 


i(Alldh)  said ,  "My  covenant  (prophethood)  includes  not 
Zdlimin  (polytheists  and  ivrongdoers) . 


Allah  mentioned  that  there  are  unjust  people  among  the 
offspring  of  Ibrahim,  and  they  will  not  benefit  from  Allah's 
promise,  nor  would  they  be  entrusted  with  anything,  even 
though  they  are  among  the  children  of  Allah's  Khalil  {intimate 
friend,  Prophet  Abraham).  There  will  also  be  those  who  do 
good  among  the  children  of  Ibrahim,  and  these  it  is  who  will 
benefit  from  Ibrahim's  supplication.  Ibn  Jarir  said  that  tftis 
Ayah  indicated  that  the  unjust  shall  not  be  Imams  for  the 
people.  Moreover,  the  Ayah  informed  Ibrahim  that  there  will  be 
unjust  people  among  his  offspring.  Also,  Ibn  Khuwayz  Mindad 
Al-Maliki  said,  “The  unjust  person  does  not  qualify  to  be  a 
Khallfah,  a  ruler,  one  who  gives  religious  verdicts,  a  witness, 
or  even  a  narrator  (of  Hadiths)” 


4325.  And  (remember)  when  We  made  the  House  (the  Ka'bah 
at  Makkah)  a  place  of  resort  for  mankind  and  a  place  of  safety. 
And  take  you  (people)  the  Maqam  (place)  of  Ibrahim  (or  the 
stone  on  zvhich  Ibrahim  as  a  place } 


The  Virtue  of  Allah’s  House 

Al-‘Awfi  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented  on  Allah's 
statement, 

4<j£^4  *1^*  c*?!  fcK*- 

iAnd  (remember)  when  We  made  the  House  (the  Ka'bah  at 
Makkah)  a  place  of  resort  for  mankind} 

“They  do  not  remain  in  the  House,  they  only  visit  it  and  return 


372 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kaihir 

to  their  homes,  and  then  visit  it  again.”  Also,  Abu  Ja'far  Ar- 
Razi  narrated  from  Ar-Rabi‘  bin  Anas  from  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  who 
said  that, 

fj  oM  ?£  >£} 

iAnd  (remember)  when  We  made  the  House  (the  Ka'bah  at 
Makkah)  a  place  of  resort  for  mankind  and  a  place  of  safety} 

means,  “Safe  from  enemies  and  armed  conflict.  During  the 
time  of  Jahiliyyah,  the  people  were  often  victims  of  raids  and 
kidnapping,  while  the  people  in  the  area  surrounding  it  ( At - 
Masjid  Al-Haram)  were  safe  and  not  subject  to  kidnapping.”111 
Also,  Mujahid,  ‘Ata’,  As-Suddi,  Qatadah  and  Ar-Rabi‘  bin  Anas 
were  reported  to  have  said  that  the  Ayah  (2:125)  means, 
“Whoever  enters  it  shall  be  safe.”121 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  Allah  honored  the  Sacred  House, 
which  Allah  made  as  a  safe  refuge  and  safe  haven.  Therefore, 
the  souls  are  eager,  but  never  bored,  to  conduct  short  visits  to 
the  House,  even  every  year.  This  is  because  Allah  accepted  the 
supplication  of  His  Khalil,  Ibrahim,  when  he  asked  Allah  to 
make  the  hearts  of  people  eager  to  visit  the  House.  Ibrahim 
said  (14:40), 

XZZj 


iOur  Lord!  And  accept  my  invocation }. 

Allah  described  the  House  as  a  safe  resort  and  refuge,  for 
those  who  visit  it  are  safe,  even  if  they  had  committed  acts  of 
evil.  This  honor  comes  from  the  honor  of  the  person  who  built 
it  first,  Khalil  Ar-Rahman,  just  as  Allah  said, 


t ¥  O1  yxjl  _r 


iAnd  (remember)  when  We  showed  Ibrahim  the  site  of  the 
(Sacred)  House  (the  Ka'bah  at  Makkah)  (saying) :  "Associate  not 
anything  (in  worship)  with  Me..."}  (22:26)  and, 


fLu 


<-  V _  /  —  V' 


111  At-Tabari  3 :29 . 

^  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :370 . 


373 


Sunk  2.  Al-Baqarah  Q01  -  124)  (Part-1) 

iVerily,  the  first  House  (of  worship)  appointed  for  mankind  was 
that  at  Bakkah  (Makkah),  full  of  blessing,  and  a  guidance  for 
Al-'Alamin  (mankind  and  Jinn).  In  it  are  manifest  signs  (for 
example),  the  Maqdm  (place)  of  Ibrahim;  whosoever  enters  it, 
he  attains  security }  (3:96-97). 

The  last  honorable  Ayah  emphasized  the  honor  of  Ibrahim’s 
Maqdm,  and  the  instruction  to  pray  next  to  it, 

iAnd  take  you  (people)  the  Maqdm  (place)  of  Ibrdlum  as  a  place 
of  prayer 

The  Maqdm  of  Ibrahim 

Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  reported  that  Sa'Id  bin  Jubayr 
commented  on  the  Ayah, 

iAnd  take  you  (people)  the  Maqdm  (place)  of  Ibrahim  as  a  place 
of  prayer ^ 

“The  stone  (Maqdm)  is  the  standing  place  of  Ibrahim,  Allah’s 
Prophet,  and  a  mercy  from  Allah.  Ibrahim  stood  on  the  stone, 
while  Ismail  was  handing  him  the  stones  (constructing  the 
Ka'bah).”^  As-Suddi  said,  “The  Maqdm  of  Ibrahim  is  a  stone 
which  Ismail’s  wife  put  under  Ibrahim’s  feet  when  washing  his 
head. "I2*  Al-Qurtubi  mentioned  this,  but  he  considered  it 
unauthentic,  although  others  gave  it  prefrence,  Ar-Razi 
reported  it  in  his  Tafsir  from  Al-Hasan  Al-Basri,  Qatadah,  and 
Ar-Rabi*  bin  AnasJ3' 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  reported  that  Jabir,  describing  the  Hajj 
(pilgrimage)  of  the  Prophet  jg  said,  “When  the  Prophet  sfe 
performed  Tawafi  Umar  asked  him,  Is  this  the  Maqdm  of  our 
father?’  He  said,  “Yes.’  Umar  said,  ‘Should  we  take  it  a  place  of 
prayer?’  So  Allah  revealed, 

4j-^“  -s &  ot 

111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :371 . 

121  At-Jabari  3:35. 

I3'  Ar-Razi  4  :45 . 


375 


Surah  2.  AhBgggrah  (101  -  124 )  (Parti} 

fjadith  that  Muslim  recorded  in  Sahib.1'1  Al-Bukhari  recorded 
that  ‘Amr  bin  Dinar  said  that  he  heard  Ibn  Umar  say,  “The 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  performed  Tawaf  around  the  House 
seven  times  and  then  prayed  two  Rak'ahs  behind  the 
Magam.”*2* 

All  these  texts  indicate  that  the  Maqam  is  the  stone  that 
Ibrahim  was  standing  on  while  building  the  House.  As  the 
House’s  walls  became  higher,  Ismail  brought  his  father  a 
stone,  so  that  he  could  stand  on  it,  while  Ismail  handed  him 
the  stones.  Ibrahim  would  place  the  stones  on  the  wall,  and 
whenever  he  finished  one  side,  he  would  move  to  the  next 
side,  to  complete  the  building  all  around.  Ibrahim  kept 
repeating  this  until  he  finished  building  the  House,  as  we  will 
describe  when  we  explain  the  story  of  Ibrahim  and  Ismail  and 
how  they  built  the  House,  as  narrated  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas  and 
collected  by  Al-Bukhari.  Ibrahim’s  footprints  were  still  visible 
in  the  stone,  and  the  Arabs  knew  this  fact  during  the  time  of 
JahiUyyah.  This  is  why  Abu  Talib  said  in  his  poem  known  as 
‘Al-Lamiyyah’,  “And  Ibrahim’s  footprint  with  his  bare  feet  on 
the  stone  is  still  visible.” 

The  Muslims  also  saw  Ibrahim’s  footprints  on  the  stone,  as 
Anas  bin  Malik  said,  “I  saw  the  Maqam  with  the  print  of 
Ibrahim’s  toes  and  feet  still  visible  in  it,  but  the  footprints 
dissipated  because  of  the  people  rubbing  the  stone  with  their 
hands.” 

Earlier,  the  Maqam  was  placed  close  to  the  Ka'bah’s  wall.  In 
the  present  time,  the  Maqam  is  placed  next  to  Al-Hijr  on  the 
right  side  of  those  entering  through  the  door. 

When  Ibrahim  finished  building  the  House,  he  placed  the 
stone  next  to  the  wall  of  Al-Ka‘bah.  Or,  when  the  House  was 
finished  being  built,  Ibrahim  just  left  the  stone  where  it  was 
last  standing,  and  he  was  commanded  to  pray  next  to  the 
stone  when  he  finished  the  Tawaf  (circumambulating).  It  is 
understandable  that  the  Maqam  of  Ibrahim  would  stand  where 
the  building  of  the  House  ended.  The  Leader  of  the  faithful 
Umar  bin  Al-Khattab,  one  of  the  Four  Rightly  Guided  Caliphs 
whom  we  were  commanded  to  emulate,  moved  the  stone  away 

111  Muslim  2:920. 

|2)  FathAl-Bari  3:586. 


376 


Tafsfr  Ibn  Kathir 


from  the  Ka'bah’s  wall  during  his  reign.  ‘Umar  is  one  of  the 
two  men,  whom  the  Messenger  of  Allah  m  described  when  he 

Said’  r  ^ 

<1  Imitate  the  two  men  who  ivill  come  after  me:  Abu  Bakr  and 
'Umar.^l] 


Umar  was  also  the  person  whom  the  Qur'an  agreed  with 
regarding  praying  next  to  Maqam  of  Ibrahim.  This  is  why  none 
among  the  Companions  rejected  it  when  he  moved  it. 

‘Abdur-Razzaq  reported  from  Ibn  Jurayj  from  ‘Ata’,  “  Umar 
bin  Al-Khattab  moved  the  Maqam  back."  Also,  ‘Abdur-Razzaq 
narrated  that  Mujahid  said  that  TJmar  was  the  first  person 
who  moved  the  Maqam  back  to  where  it  is  now  standing.”  Al- 
Hafiz  Abu  Bakr,  Ahmad  bin  ‘Ali  bin  Al-Husayn  Al-Bayhaqi 
recorded  ‘A'ishah  saying,  “During  the  time  of  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  and  Abu  Bakr,  the  Maqam  was  right  next  to  the  House. 
TJmar  moved  the  Maqam  during  his  reign.”  This  Hadith  has 
an  authentic  chain  of  narration. 


jti  J 

Cr*'*  Cr*  40*"^  ot  W*  bfc 

cXf  Cj5  ^  *>Uj 

4^  "llljj j  iiM  0^*1 — «  Li«JN.ij  WV,  it*  -Jj 

cJ  \j ull 


4125.  And  We  commanded  Ibrahim  (Abraham)  and  Ismail 
(Ishmael)  that  they  should  purify  My  House  (the  Ka'bah  at 
Makkah)  for  those  who  are  circumambulating  it ,  or  staying 
(I'tikdf),  or  bowing  or  prostrating  themselves  (there,  in 
prayer)  .} 

4126.  And  (remember)  when  Ibrahim  said,  "My  Lord,  make 
this  city  (Makkah)  a  place  of  security  and  provide  its  people 
with  fruits,  such  of  them  as  believe  in  Allah  and  the  Last  Day." 
He  (Allah)  answered:  "As  for  him  who  disbelieves,  1  shall  leave 
him  in  contentment  for  a  while,  then  I  shall  compel  him  to  the 
torment  of  the  Fire,  and  worst  indeed  is  that  destination!"} 


IM 


Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  :569. 


377 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149}  (Parti) 


4127.  And  (remember) 
when  Ibrahim  and  (7ns 
son)  Isma'il  were  raising 
the  foundations  of  the 
House  (the  Ka'bah  at 
Makkah) ,  (saying), 
"Our  Lord!  Accept  (this 
service)  from  us.  Verily, 
You  are  the  Hearer,  the 
Knower."} 

4128.  " Our  Lord!  And 
make  us  submissive  unto 
You  and  of  our  offspring 
a  nation  submissive 
unto  You,  and  show  us 
our  Manasik,  and  accept 
our  repentance.  Truly, 
You  are  the  One  Who 
accepts  repentance,  the 
Most  Merciful 

The  Command  to 
purify  the  House 

Al-Hasan  Al-Basri 
said  that, 

4And  We  gave  Our  'Ahd  (command)  to  Ibrahim  and  Isma'il} 

means,  “Allah  ordered  them  to  purify  it  from  all  filth  and 
impurities,  of  which  none  should  ever  touch  it.”11'  Also,  Ibn 
Jurayj  said,  “I  said  to  ‘Ata’,  What  is  Allah’s  ‘ Ahd ?’  He  said, 
*His  command.”’  Also,  Said  bin  Jubayr  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
commented  on  the  Ayah, 

(jr? 

ithat  they  should  purify  My  House  (the  Ka'bah)  for  those  who 
are  circumambulating  it,  or  staying  (I'tikdf)} 


Sf, 0 

jut*l '  JV5 

0t>£&$&Z 


^  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :373. 


378 _ Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

“Purify  it  from  the  idols.”  Further,  Mujahid  and  Said  bin 
Jubayr  said  that, 

'<£■  'Sift 

ipurify  My  House  for  those  who  are  circumambulating  it} 

means,  “From  the  idols,  sexual  activity,  false  witness  and  sins 
of  all  kinds.” 

Allah  said, 

ifor  those  who  are  petforming  Tawaf  (circumambulating)  it}. 

The  Tawaf  around  the  House  is  a  well-established  ritual, 
Said  bin  Jubayr  said  that, 

ifor  those  who  are  circumambulating  it} 

means,  strangers  (he  means  who  do  not  live  in  Makkah), 
while; 


ior  staying  (I'tikdfi} 

is  about  those  who  live  in  the  area  of  the  Sacred  House.1'1 
Also,  Qatadah  and  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  said  that  Ttikaf  is  in 
reference  to  those  who  live  in  the  area  of  the  House,  just  as 
Said  bin  Jubayr  stated.*21  Allah  said, 


ior  bowing  or  prostrating  themselves  (there,  in  prayer)} 

Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  when  it  is  a  place  of  prayer  it  includes  those 
who  are  described  as  bowing  and  prostrating  themselves.*3* 
Also,  ‘Ata’  and  Qatadah  offered  the  same  Tafsir ,*4* 

Purifying  all  Masjids  is  required  according  to  this  Ayah  and 
according  to  Allah’s  statement, 


Q  %  £4  % U  £  gs  J  %  4  *£  cfo 


*'■  Ibn  Abi  HStim  1 :375. 
*2*  Ibid. 

*3'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :376. 
*4'  Ibid. 


Surah  2.  Al-Bagarah  (125  -  149)  (Parti} 


379 


iln  houses  (mosques)  which  Allah  has  ordered  to  be  raised  (to 
be  cleaned,  and  to  be  honored),  in  them  His  Name  is 
remembered  (i.e.  Adhan,  Iqdmah,  Saldh,  invocations,  recitation 
of  the  Qur'an).  Therein  glorify  Him  (Allah)  in  the  mornings 
and  in  the  (late)  afternoons ^  (24:36). 

There  are  many  Hadiths  that  give  a  general  order  for 
purifying  the  Masjids  and  keeping  filth  and  impurities  away 
from  them.  This  is  why  the  Prophet  sg  said, 

olj  UJ  olJ  UJj. 

«77»e  Masjids  are  established  for  the  purpose  that  they  were 
built  for  (i.e.  worshipping  Allah  alone). ^ 

I  have  collected  a  book  on  this  subject,  and  all  praise  is  due 
to  Allah. 


Makkah  is  a  Sacred  Area 


Allah  said, 


at  Is*}*  Jfi 

4j® 


4 And  (remember)  when  Ibrahim  said,  "My  Lord,  make  this  city 
(Makkah)  a  place  of  security  and  provide  its  people  with  fruits, 
such  of  them  as  believe  in  Allah  and  the  Last  Day/'} 

Imam  Abu  Jafar  bin  Jarir  At-Tabari  narrated  that  Jabir  bin 
‘Abdullah  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  gg  said, 


iuJ  *  jT  U  £,jJl 


<*13  ol* 

fat  'jj  UjL_i 


* Ibrahim  made  Allah's  House  a  Sacred  Area  and  a  safe  refuge. 
I  have  made  what  is  between  the  two  sides  of  Al-Madinah  a 
Sacred  Area.  Therefore,  its  game  should  not  be  hunted,  and  its 
trees  should  not  be  cwM*21  An-Nasal131  and  Muslim*41  also 
recorded  this  Hadith.  1 


111  Muslim  1  :397. 

*21  At-Tabari  3:47. 

131  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  2 :487 . 
141  Muslim  2:992. 


There  are  several  other  Hadiths  that  indicate  that  Allah 
made  Makkah  a  sacred  area  before  He  created  the  heavens 
and  earth.  The  Two  Sahihts  recorded  ‘Abdullah  bin  ‘Abbas 
saying  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  sg  said, 


flj*"  ji*  <j)l  30 

i/5  !hi  cM  ^  fJi 

kil:  v'3  Tj  1^:  n  sdi  $  Ji  <ii  ^  ^ 

^>•^1  'jl  :<il  15*  *1*^- 

«>W'  ^33  ‘r0  fy 


*  Allah  has  made  this  city  a  sanctuary  (sacred  place)  the  Day  He 
created  the  heavens  and  earth.  Therefore,  it  is  a  sanctuary  until 
the  Day  of  Resurrection  because  Allah  made  it  a  sanctuary.  It 
was  not  legal  for  anyone  to  fight  in  it  before  me,  and  it  was 
legal  for  me  for  a  few  hours  of  one  day.  Therefore,  it  is  a 
sanctuary  until  the  Day  of  Resurrection,  because  Allah  made  it 
a  sanctuary.  None  is  allowed  to  uproot  its  thorny  shrubs,  or  to 
chase  its  game,  or  to  pick  up  something  that  has  fallen,  except 
by  a  person  u)ho  announces  it  publicly,  nor  should  any  of  its 
trees  be  cut  J  Al- ‘Abbas  said,  ‘O  Messenger  of  Allah!  Except 
the  lemon-grass,  for  our  goldsmiths  and  for  our  graves.’ 
The  Prophet  added,  « Except  lemon-grass .»m 

This  is  the  wording  of  Muslim.  The  Two  Sahihs  also  recorded 
Abu  Hurayrah  narrating  a  similar  Hadith,  while  Al-Bukhan 
recorded  a  similar  Hadith  from  Safiyyah  bint  Shaybah  who 
narrated  it  from  the  Prophet  sfe.|2) 

Abu  Shurayh  Al-‘Adawi  said  that  he  said  to  ‘Amr  bin  Said 
while  he  was  sending  armies  to  Makkah,  “O  Commander!  Let 
me  narrate  a  Hadith  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  5—  said  the 
day  that  followed  the  victory  of  Makkah.  My  ears  heard  the 
Hadith,  my  heart  comprehended  it,  and  my  eyes  saw  the 
Prophet  when  he  said  it.  He  thanked  Allah  and  praised  him 
and  then  said. 


I1*  Fath  Al-Sori4:56,  and  Muslim  2 :986. 
121  Fath  At-Bari  3 :253 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149 )  (Part-1 ) 


381 


<3)1  J&j  l_raj" y  -I^  Ctf  JLiuu  Vj  US  slU.‘.J  jl 

'  '  '  * 

-**J  Irf  jjf  <3)1  jl  :  I _jJ jjj 

•wtiJl  -Ull]l  (_rw *S/  Li  l$i<^AS’  ^ _jl]l  Oil* 


8 Allah ,  not  the  people,  made  Makkah  a  sanctuary,  so  any 
person  who  has  belief  in  Allah  and  the  Last  Day,  should  neither 
shed  blood  in  it  nor  should  he  cut  down  its  trees.  If  anybody 
argues  that  fighting  in  it  is  permissible  on  the  basis  that  Allah’s 
Messenger  fought  in  Makkah,  say  to  him,  'Allah  allowed  His 
Messenger  and  did  not  allow  you.’  Allah  allowed  me  only  for  a 
few  hours  on  that  day  (of  the  Conquest),  and  today  its  sanctity 
is  valid  as  it  was  before.  So,  those  who  are  present  should 
inform  those  who  are  absent  (concerning  this  fact ).» 

Abu  Shurayh  was  asked,  “What  did  ‘Amr  reply?’  He  said, 
(‘Amr  said)  ‘O  Abu  Shurayh!  I  know  better  than  you  about 
this,  the  Sacred  House  does  not  give  protection  to  a  sinner,  a 
murderer  or  a  thief.’  This  Hadith  was  collected  by  Al-Bukhari 
and  Muslim.1*1 


After  this,  there  is  no  contradiction  between  the  Hadiths  that 
stated  that  Allah  made  Makkah  a  sanctuary  when  He  created 
the  heavens  and  earth  and  the  Hadiths  that  Ibrahim  made  it  a 
sanctuary,  since  Ibrahim  conveyed  Allah’s  decree  that  Makkah 
is  a  sanctuary,  before  he  built  the  House.  Similarly,  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  sfe  was  written  as  the  Final  Prophet  when 
Adam  was  still  clay.  Yet,  Ibrahim  said, 


rfi  CSfr 


iOur  Lord1.  Send  amongst  them  a  Messenger  of  their  own } 
(2:129). 


Allah  accepted  Ibrahim’s  supplication,  although  He  had  full 
knowledge  beforehand  that  it  will  occur  by  His  decree.  To 
further  elaborate  on  this  subject,  we  should  mention  the 
Hadith  about  what  the  Messenger  of  Allah  j&j  said  when  he  was 
asked,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah!  Tell  us  about  how  your 
prophethood  started.”  He  -fe  said, 


m 


Fath  Al-Bari  4  :50,  and  Muslim  2  :987 . 


382 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


aj>LL)l  jj  -■»«  d 


«/  am  Me  supplication  of  my  father  Ibrahim,  the  good  news  of 
Jesus,  the  son  of  Mary,  and  my  mother  saw  a  light  that 
radiated  from  her  which  illuminated  the  castles  of  Ash-Sham 
(Syria),  i™ 

In  this  Hadith,  the  Companions  asked  the  Messenger 
about  the  beginning  of  his  prophethood.  We  will  explain  this 
matter  later,  if  Allah  wills. 


Ibrahim  invokes  Allah  to  make  Makkah  an  Area  of 
Safety  and  Sustenance 

Allah  said  that  Ibrahim  said, 

£&  'i*  cf,} 

iMy  Lord,  make  this  city  (Makkah)  a  place  of  security} 
(2:126) 

from  terror,  so  that  its  people  do  not  suffer  from  fear.  Allah 
accepted  Ibrahim’s  supplication.  Allah  said, 

iU  x  fix  & 

^Whosoever  enters  it,  he  attains  security}  (3:97)  and, 

&  J&Zj  £X  CjX  CiZ  @  £ 

4 Have  they  not  seen  that  We  have  made  (Makkah)  a  secure 
sanctuary,  while  men  are  being  snatched  away  from  all  around 
them?}  (29:67). 

We  have  already  mentioned  the  Hadiths  that  prohibit  fighting 
in  the  Sacred  Area.  Muslim  recorded  that  Jabir  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 

•No  one  is  allowed  to  carry  weapons  in  Makkah. ®121  Allah 
mentioned  that  Ibrahim  said, 


^  Ahmad  5 :262 . 
121  Muslim  2 :989 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149 )  (Parti} 


383 


iMy  Lord,  make  this  city  (Makkah)  a  place  of  security } 

meaning,  make  this  a  safe  city.  This  occurred  before  the 
Ka'bah  was  built.  Allah  said  in  Surat  Ibr&him, 


4And  (remember)  when  Ibrdltim  said,  "My  Lord!  Make  this 
city  (Makkah)  one  of  peace  and  security..."}  (14:35) 


as  here,  Ibrahim  supplicated  a  second  time  after  the  House 
was  built  and  its  people  lived  around  it,  after  Ishaq  who  was 
thirteen  years  Ismail’s  junior  was  bom.  This  is  why  at  the 
end  of  his  supplication,  Ibrahim  said  here, 


4A11  the  praises  and  thanks  be  to  Allah,  Who  has  given  me  in 
old  age  Ismd'il  (Ishmael)  and  Ishaq  (Isaac).  Verily,  my  Lord  is 
indeed  the  Hearer  of  invocations}  (14:39). 

Allah  said  next, 


yji  .*4^  J-j  jfi'1  (*rJ  P'-  is  M  &&} 

4^  JiJ  4« 


i" ...and  provide  its  people  with  fruits,  such  of  them  as  believe 
in  Allah  and  the  Last  Day."  He  (Allah)  answered:  "As  for  him 
who  disbelieves,  I  shall  leave  him  in  contentment  for  a  while, 
then  I  shall  compel  him  to  the  torment  of  the  Fire,  and  worst 
indeed  is  that  destination!”} 


Ibn  Jarir  said  that  Ubayy  bin  Ka*b  commented  on, 
tjljc  jw  XJ»  f. 'jfo  Jy  ji} 


4He  answered:  "As  for  him  who  disbelieves,  I  shall  leave  him 
in  contentment  for  a  while,  then  I  shall  compel  him  to  the 
tortnent  of  the  Fire,  and  worst  indeed  is  that  destination !”} 

“These  are  Allah’s  Words  (meaning  not  Ibrahim’s)”*11  This  is 
also  the  Tafsir  of  Mujahid  and  Ikrimah.*2*  Furthermore,  Ibn 
Abi  Hatim  narrated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented  on  Allah’s 
statement, 


111  At-Tabari  3:53. 
121  At-Tabari  3 :54 . 


384 


Ta  fsir  Ibn  Katlm 


4  (►&  0?'»  iP  0>“*'  it  &ub  'it'*  'jj;  'j!»  *jy^ 


4My  Lord,  make  this  city  (Makkah)  a  place  of  security  and 
provide  its  people  with  fruits,  such  of  them  as  believe  in  Allah 
and  the  Last  Day.} 

“Ibrahim  asked  Allah  to  grant  sustenance  for  the  believers 
only.  However,  Allah  revealed,  1  will  also  provide  for  the 
disbelievers,  just  as  I  shall  provide  for  the  believers.  Would  I 
create  something  and  not  sustain  and  provide  for?  I  shall 
allow  the  disbelievers  little  delight,  and  then  force  them  to  the 
torment  of  the  Fire,  and  what  an  evil  destination.”1*1  Ibn 
‘Abbas  then  recited, 


in. |>j$z  of  &  \  .j£  u  flfjij  U 


iOn  each  these  as  well  as  those  We  bestow  from  the  bounties  of 
your  Lord.  And  the  bounties  of  your  Lord  can  never  be 
forbidden}  (17:20). 

This  was  recorded  by  Ibn  Marduwyah,  who  also  recorded 
similar  statements  from  Ikrimah  and  Mujahid.  Similarly,  Allah 
said, 


4  \yf?  oj IjjiH  vSUu)i  i+iij;  iS 


iVerily,  those  who  invent  a  lie  against  Allah  will  never  be 
successful.  (A  brief)  enjoyment  in  this  world!  And  then  unto 
Us  will  be  their  return,  then  We  shall  make  them  taste  the 
severest  torment  because  they  used  to  disbelieve.}  (10:69-70), 


.<  t>.'  ''<1'  s.  %*. '  ,✓  >>;>:  •>*  *'  .'.t,  '•t?' 

yli.  Alii  Uj  |,j*  a  I  LJ[  jiyiS  _^iS 

— a'ac  d)  jt:  yji 


iAnd  whoever  disbelieves,  let  not  his  disbelief  grieve  you  (O 
Multammad  jgs).  To  Us  is  their  return,  and  We  shall  inform 
tltem  what  they  have  done.  Verily,  Allah  is  the  Knower  of  what 
is  in  the  breasts  (of  men).  We  let  them  enjoy  for  a  little  while, 
then  in  the  end  We  shall  oblige  them  to  (enter)  a  great 
torment.}  (31:23-24)  and, 


1,1  IbnAbi  Hatim  1:377. 


385 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149)  (Part-1) 


j _ Lj  ^  liiJ  J3  LlA»J  J-UJ'  0^3  i? 

J£=»  0|>  L^*  b,~_>  & 

4  ‘t* ,  jullu  jijj  i-t  Ci!'  ;£&'  ^  lli  iiji 


4A;i<i  were  it  not  that  mankind  would  have  become  of  one 
community  (all  disbelievers  desiring  worldly  life  only),  Wc 
would  have  provided  for  those  who  disbelieve  in  the  Most 
Gracious  (Allah),  silver  roofs  for  their  houses,  and  elevators 
whereby  they  ascend.  And  for  their  houses,  doors  (of  silver), 
and  thrones  (of  silver)  on  which  they  could  recline.  And 
adornments  of  gold.  Yet  all  this  would  have  been  nothing  but 
an  enjoyment  of  this  world.  And  the  Hereafter  with  your  Lord 
is  (only)  for  the  Muttaqfn  (the  pious).}  (43:33-35). 

Allah  said  next, 


4JUS1 


Si)  jU'  wfc 


iThen  l  shall  compel  him  to  the  torment  of  the  Fire,  and  worst 
indeed  is  that  destination !} 


meaning,  “After  the  delight  that  the  disbeliever  enjoyed  in  this 
life,  I  will  make  his  destination  torment  in  the  Fire,  and  what 
an  evil  destination.”  This  Ayah  indicates  that  Allah  gives  the 
disbelievers  respite  and  then  seizes  them  in  a  manner 
compatible  to  His  greatness  and  ability.  This  Ayah  is  similar  to 
Allah’s  statement, 


4  IK  i-P'  3)  £ -U  ilili  clA)  LA  li'  ijji 


iAnd  many  a  township  did  l  give  respite  while  it  was  given  to 
wrongdoing.  Then  (in  the  end)  I  seized  it  (with  punishment) . 
And  to  Me  is  the  (final)  rehim  (of  all)}  (22:48), 


Also,  the  Two  Sahihs  recorded, 

ofLiu  4)1  'j*  Ifi-  'fJ* i  i>-\ 


“No  one  is  more  patient  than  Allah  when  hearing  abuse.  They 
attribute  a  son  to  Him,  while  He  grants  them  sustenance  and 
health .»|1) 


The  Sahlh  also  recorded, 


(1’  FathAl-Bari  13:372,  and  Muslim  4:2160. 


386 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 


*«d«i  pJ  'ij  (JUaJJ  <&'  j>! 

11  Allah  gives  respite  to  the  unjust  person,  until  wlten  He  seizes 
him;  He  never  lets  go  of  him.* 111 


He  then  recited  Allah’s  statement, 


4§;i4  Uj  k  &  & 


iSuch  is  the  punishment  of  your  Lord  when  He  punishes  the 
(population  of)  towns  while  they  are  doing  wrong.  Verily ,  His 
punishment  is  painful  (and)  severe }.  (11:102) 


Building  the  Ka*bah  and  asking  Allah  to  accept  This 
Deed 


Allah  said, 

%  $$  S^.}S 

4fjd  3i  Mt  ik  i/j  A  tLii 


clJi  cn  jZ-Ktl  c*/.  A& 

'iU  pilLl*  liJ-'j 


(remember)  when  Ibrahim  (Abraham)  and  (his  son) 
Ismd'il  (Ishmael)  were  raising  the  foundations  of  the  House  (the 
Ka'bah  at  Makkah),  (saying),  "Our  Lord!  Accept  (this  service) 
from  us.  Verily,  You  are  the  Hearer,  the  Knower.  Our  Lord! 
And  make  us  submissive  unto  You  and  of  our  offspring  a 
nation  submissive  unto  You,  and  show  us  our  Mandsik  and 
accept  our  repentance.  Truly,  You  are  the  One  Who  accepts 
repentance,  the  Most  Merciful."} 

Allah  said,  “O  Muhammad!  Remind  your  people  when 
Ibrahim  and  Ismail  built  the  House  and  raised  its  foundations 
while  saying, 

Cj} 

iOur  Lord!  Accept  (this  service)  from  us.  Verily,  You  are  the 
Hearer,  the  Knower."} 

Al-Qurtubi  mentioned  that  Ubayy  and  Ibn  Mas'ud  used  to 
recite  the  Ayah  this  way, 


m 


Fath  Al-Bari  8 :205 . 


387 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149)  (Part-1) 


^  jljtJ  o')  jJUj  J J  C.ijl  ^ 

U2i 


4Anrf  (remember)  when  Ibrahim  and  (his  son)  Ismd'il  were 
raising  the  foundations  of  the  House  (the  Ka'bah  at  Makkah), 
Saying,  " Our  Lord!  Accept  (this  service)  from  us.  Verily,  You 
are  the  Hearer,  the  Knower.''}l}' 


What  further  testifies  to  this  statement  (which  adds  ‘saying’ 
to  the  Ayah )  by  Ubayy  and  Ibn  Mas*ud,  is  what  came 
afterwards, 


iOur  Lord!  And  make  us  submissive  unto  You  and  of  our 
offspring  a  nation  submissive  unto  You}. 


The  Prophets  Ibrahim  and  Ismail  were  performing  a  good 
deed,  yet  they  asked  Allah  to  accept  this  good  deed  from  them. 
Ibn  Abi  Hatim  narrated  that  Wuhayb  bin  Al-Ward  recited, 


i\i>  jii  uj 


iAnd  (remember)  when  Ibrahim  and  (his  son)  Ismd'il  were 
raising  the  foundations  of  the  House  (the  Ka'bah  at  Makkah), 
(saying),  "Our  Lord!  Accept  (this  service)  from  us"} 

and  cried  and  said,  “O  Khalil  of  Ar-Rahmanl  You  raise  the 
foundations  of  the  House  of  Ar-Rahman  (Allah),  yet  you  are 
afraid  that  He  will  not  accept  it  from  you?”*21  This  is  the 
behavior  of  the  sincere  believers,  whom  Allah  described  in  His 
statement, 


iAnd  those  who  give  that  which  they  give}  (23:60) 

meaning,  they  give  away  voluntary  charity,  and  perform  the 
acts  of  worship  yet, 

its 

iioith  their  hearts  full  of  fear}  (23:60) 

111  Al-Qurtubi  2:126. 

'2'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :384 . 


388 


Tafetr  Ibn  Kathfr 


afraid  that  these  good  deeds  might  not  be  accepted  of  them. 
There  is  an  authentic  Hadith  narrated  by  ‘A’ishah  on  this 
subject,  which  we  will  mention  later,  Allah  willing. 

Al-Bukhari  recorded  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Prophet  Ibrahim 
took  Ismail  and  his  mother  and  went  away  with  them  until  he 
reached  the  area  of  the  House,  where  he  left  them  next  to  a 
tree  above  Zamzam  in  the  upper  area  of  the  Masjid .  During 
that  time,  Ismail's  mother  was  still  nursing  him.  Makkah  was 
then  uninhabited,  and  there  was  no  water  source  in  it. 
Ibrahim  left  them  there  with  a  bag  containing  some  dates  and 
a  water-skin  containing  water.  Ibrahim  then  started  to  leave, 
and  Ismail’s  mother  followed  him  and  said,  ‘O  Ibrahim!  To 
whom  are  you  leaving  us  in  this  barren  valley  that  is  not 
inhabited?’  She  repeated  the  question  several  times  and 
Ibrahim  did  not  reply.  She  asked,  Has  Allah  commanded  you 
to  do  this?’  He  said,  ‘Yes.’  She  said,  1  am  satisfied  that  Allah 
will  never  abandon  us.’  Ibrahim  left,  and  when  he  was  far 
enough  away  where  they  could  not  see  him,  close  to 
Thaniyyah,  he  faced  the  House,  raised  his  hands  and 
supplicated, 


it 


40  our  Lord!  I  have  made  some  of  my  offspring  to  dwell  in  an 
uncultivable  valley  by  Your  Sacred  House  (the  Ka'bah  at 
Makkah)}  until, 


iGive  thanks }  (14:37). 

Ismail’s  mother  then  returned  to  her  place,  started  drinking 
water  from  the  water-skin  and  nursing  Ismail.  When  the 
water  was  used  up,  she  and  her  son  became  thirsty.  She 
looked  at  him,  and  he  was  suffering  from  thirst;  she  left, 
because  she  disliked  seeing  his  face  in  that  condition.  She 
found  the  nearest  mountian  to  where  she  was,  As-Safa, 
ascended  it  and  looked,  in  vain,  hoping  to  see  somebody. 
When  she  came  down  to  the  valley,  she  raised  her  garment 
and  ran,  just  as  a  tired  person  runs,  until  she  reached  the  Al- 
Marwah  mountain.  In  vain,  she  looked  to  see  if  there  was 
someone  there.  She  ran  to  and  fro  (between  the  two 
mountains)  seven  times.”  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  the  Messenger 


389 


Sutvh  2.  Al-Baqarah  025  -  149}  (Part-1) 

of  Allah  sg  said,  “This  is  why  the  people  make  the  trip  between 
As-Safa  and  Al-Marwah  (during  Hajj  and  Umrah).” 

“When  she  reached  Al-Marwah,  she  heard  a  voice  and  said, 
‘Shush,’  to  herself.  She  tried  to  hear  the  voice  again  and  when 
she  did,  she  said,  1  have  heard  you.  Do  you  have  relief?’  She 
found  the  angel  digging  with  his  heel  (or  his  wing)  where 
Zamzam  now  exists,  and  the  water  gushed  out.  Ismail’s 
mother  was  astonished  and  started  digging,  using  her  hand  to 
transfer  water  to  the  water-skin.”  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  the 
Prophet  jg  then  said,  “May  Allah  grant  His  mercy  to  the  mother 
of  Ismail,  had  she  left  the  water,  (flow  naturally  without  her 
intervention),  it  would  have  been  flowing  on  the  surface  of  the 
earth.” 

“Ismail’s  mother  started  drinking  the  water  and  her  milk 
increased  for  her  child.  The  angel  (Gabriel)  said  to  her,  ‘Do  not 
fear  abandonment.  There  shall  be  a  House  for  Allah  built  here 
by  this  boy  and  his  father.  Allah  does  not  abandon  His 
people.’  During  that  time,  the  area  of  the  House  was  raised 
above  ground  level  and  the  floods  used  to  reach  its  right  and 
left  sides. 

Afterwards  some  people  of  the  tribe  of  Jurhum,  passing 
through  Kada’,  made  camp  at  the  bottom  of  the  valley.  They 
saw  some  birds,  they  were  astonished,  and  said,  ‘Birds  can 
only  be  found  at  a  place  where  there  is  water.  We  did  not 
notice  before  that  this  valley  had  water.’  They  sent  a  scout  or 
two  who  searched  the  area,  found  the  water,  and  returned  to 
inform  them  about  it.  Then  they  all  went  to  Ismail’s  mother, 
next  to  the  water,  and  said,  ‘O  Mother  of  Ismail!  Will  you 
allow  us  to  be  with  you  (or  dwell  with  you)?’  She  said,  ‘Yes. 
But  you  will  have  no  exclusive  right  to  the  water  here.’  They 
said,  *We  agree.’”  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  the  Prophet  jg  said,  “At 
that  time,  Ismail's  mother  liked  to  have  human  company.” 

“And  thus  they  stayed  there  and  sent  for  their  relatives  to 
join  them.  Later  on,  her  boy  reached  the  age  of  puberty  and 
married  a  lady  from  them,  for  Ismail  learned  Arabic  from 
them,  and  they  liked  the  way  he  was  raised.  Ismail’s  mother 
died  after  that. 

Then  an  idea  occurred  to  Abraham  to  visit  his  dependents. 
So  he  left  (to  Makkah).  When  he  arrived,  he  did  not  find 
Ismail,  so  he  asked  his  wife  about  him.  She  said,  He  has 


390 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

gone  out  hunting.’  When  he  asked  her  about  their  living 
conditions,  she  complained  to  him  that  they  live  in  misery  and 
poverty.  Abraham  said  (to  her),  When  your  husband  comes, 
convey  my  greeting  and  tell  him  to  change  the  threshold  of  his 
gate.’  When  Ismail  came,  he  sensed  that  they  had  a  visitor 
and  asked  his  wife,  ‘Did  we  have  a  visitor?’  She  said,  “Yes.  An 
old  man  came  to  visit  us  and  asked  me  about  you,  and  I  told 
him  where  you  were.  He  also  asked  about  our  condition,  and  I 
told  him  that  we  live  in  hardship  and  poverty.’  Ismail  said, 
‘Did  he  ask  you  to  do  anything?’  She  said,  Yes.  He  asked  me 
to  convey  his  greeting  and  that  you  should  change  the 
threshold  of  your  gate.’  Ismail  said  to  her,  He  was  my  father 
and  you  are  the  threshold,  so  go  to  your  family  (i.e.  you  are 
divorced).’  So  he  divorced  her  and  married  another  woman. 

Again  Ibrahim  thought  of  visiting  his  dependents  whom  he 
had  left  (at  Makkah).  Ibrahim  came  to  Ismail’s  house,  but  did 
not  find  Ismail  and  asked  his  wife,  Where  is  Ismail?’  Ismail’s 
wife  replied,  ‘He  has  gone  out  hunting.’  He  asked  her  about 
their  condition,  and  she  said  that  they  have  a  good  life  and 
praised  Allah.  Ibrahim  asked,  What  is  your  food  and  what  is 
your  drink?’  She  replied,  ‘Our  food  is  meat  and  our  drink  is 
water.’  He  said,  ‘O  Allah!  Bless  their  meat  and  their  drink.’” 
The  Prophet  (Muhammad  s&)  said,  “They  did  not  have  crops 
then,  otherwise  Ibrahim  would  have  invoked  Allah  to  bless  that 
too.  Those  who  do  not  live  in  Makkah  cannot  bear  eating  a  diet 
only  containing  meat  and  water.” 

“Ibrahim  said,  When  Ismail  comes  back,  convey  my  greeting 
to  him  and  ask  him  to  keep  the  threshold  of  his  gate.’  When 
Ismail  came  back,  he  asked,  ‘Has  anyone  visited  us.’  She  said, 
Yes.  A  good  looking  old  man,’  and  she  praised  Ibrahim,  ‘And 
he  asked  me  about  our  livelihood  and  I  told  him  that  we  live 
in  good  conditions.’  He  asked,  ‘Did  he  ask  you  to  convey  any 
message?’  She  said,  Yes.  He  conveyed  his  greeting  to  you  and 
said  that  you  should  keep  the  threshold  of  your  gate.’  Ismail 
said,  That  was  my  father,  and  you  are  the  threshold;  he 
commanded  me  to  keep  you.’ 

Ibrahim  then  came  back  visiting  and  found  Ismail  behind 
the  Zamzam  well,  next  to  a  tree,  mending  his  arrows.  When  he 
saw  Ibrahim,  he  stood  up  and  they  greeted  each  other,  just  as 


391 


Surah  2.  AlzBagargh  (125  -  149}  (Part-1) 

the  father  and  son  greet  each  other.  Ibrahim  said,  ‘O  Ismail, 
Your  Lord  has  ordered  me  to  do  something.’  He  said,  ‘Obey 
your  Lord.’  He  asked  Ismail,  Will  you  help  me?’  He  said,  'Yes, 

1  will  help  you.’  Ibrahim  said,  ‘Allah  has  commanded  me  to 
build  a  house  for  Him  there,’  and  he  pointed  to  an  area  that 
was  above  ground  level.  So,  both  of  them  rose  and  started  to 
raise  the  foundations  of  the  House.  Abraham  started  building 
(the  Ka'bah),  while  Ismail  continued  handing  him  the  stones. 
Both  of  them  were  saying,  ‘O  our  Lord  !  Accept  (this  service) 
from  us,  Verily,  You  are  the  Hearing,  the  Knowing.’ 
(2.127).’”111  Hence,  they  were  building  the  House,  part  by  part, 
going  around  it  and  saying, 

iJM'  y*  £1 4  % 

iOur  Lord!  Accept  (this  service)  from  us.  Verily,  You  are  the 

Hearer,  the  Ktmver.} 

The  Story  of  rebuilding  the  House  by  Quraysh  before  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  was  sent  as  Prophet 

In  his  Slrah,  Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  bin  Yasar  said,  “When 
the  Messenger  of  Allah  sg  reached  thirty-five  years  of  age,  the 
Quraysh  gathered  to  rebuild  the  Ka'bah,  this  included  covering 
it  with  a  roof.  However,  they  were  weary  of  demolishing  it. 
During  that  time,  the  Ka'bah  was  barely  above  a  man’s 
shoulder,  so  they  wanted  to  raise  its  height  and  build  a  ceiling 
on  top.  Some  people  had  stolen  the  Ka'bah’ s  treasure 
beforehand,  which  used  to  be  in  a  well  in  the  middle  of  the 
Ka'bah.  The  treasure  was  later  found  with  a  man  called, 
Duwayk,  a  freed  servant  of  Bani  Mulayh  bin  ‘Amr,  from  the 
tribe  of  Khuza'ah.  The  Quraysh  cut  off  his  hand  as 
punishment.  Some  people  claimed  that  those  who  actually  stole 
the  treasure  left  it  with  Duwayk.  Afterwards,  the  sea  brought  a 
ship  that  belonged  to  a  Roman  merchant  to  the  shores  of 
Jeddah,  where  it  washed-up.  So  they  collected  the  ship’s  wood 
to  use  it  for  the  Ka'bah’ s  ceiling;  a  Coptic  carpenter  in  Makkah 
prepared  what  they  needed  for  the  job. 

When  they  decided  to  begin  the  demolition  process  to  rebuild 


111  FathAl-Bari  6:456. 


_  Tafsir  l_bn  Kathfr 

the  House,  Abu  Wahb  bin  ‘Amr  bin  ‘A’idh  bin  ‘Abd  bin  Imran 
bin  Makhzum  took  a  stone  from  the  Ka'bah,  the  stone  slipped 
from  his  hand  and  went  back  to  where  it  had  been.  He  said, 
‘O  people  of  Quraysh!  Do  not  spend  on  rebuilding  the  House, 
except  from  what  was  earned  from  pure  sources.  No  money 
earned  from  a  prostitute,  usury  or  injustice  should  be 
included.’”  Ibn  Ishaq  commented  here  that  the  people  also 
attribute  these  words  to  Al-Walid  bin  Al-Mughirah  bin 
‘Abdullah  bin  ‘Amr  bin  MakhzumJ1' 

Ibn  Ishaq  continued,  “The  Quraysh  began  to  organize  their 
efforts  to  rebuild  the  Ka'bah,  each  subtribe  taking  the 
responsibility  of  rebuilding  a  designated  part  of  it. 

However,  they  were  still  weary  about  bringing  down  the 
Ka'bah.  Al-Walid  bin  Al-Mughirah  said,  1  will  start  to  bring  it 
down.’  He  held  an  ax  and  stood  by  the  Ka'bah  and  said,  ‘O 
Allah!  No  harm  is  meant.  O  Allah!  We  only  seek  to  do  a  good 
service.’  He  then  started  to  chop  the  House’s  stones.  The 
people  waited  that  night  and  said,  *We  will  wait  and  see.  If 
something  strikes  him,  we  will  not  bring  it  down  and  instead 
rebuid  it  the  way  it  was.  If  nothing  happens  to  him,  then  Allah 
will  have  agreed  to  what  we  are  doing.’  The  next  morning,  Al- 
Walid  went  to  work  on  the  Ka'bah,  and  the  people  started 
bringing  the  Ka'bah  down  with  him.  When  they  reached  the 
foundations  that  Ibrahim  built,  they  uncovered  green  stones 
that  were  above  each  other,  just  like  a  pile  of  spears.”  Ibn 
Ishaq  then  said  that  some  people  told  him,  “A  man  from 
Quraysh,  who  was  helping  rebuild  the  Ka'bah,  placed  the 
shovel  between  two  of  these  stones  to  pull  them  up;  when  one 
of  the  stones  was  moved,  all  of  Makkah  shook,  so  they  did  not 
dig  up  these  stones.  ”*2* 

The  Dispute  regarding  Who  should  place  the  Black 
Stone  in  Its  Place 

Ibn  Ishaq  said,  “The  tribes  of  Quraysh  collected  stones  to 
rebuild  the  House,  each  tribe  collecting  on  their  own.  They 
started  rebuilding  it,  until  the  rebuilding  of  the  Ka'bah 
reached  the  point  where  the  Black  Stone  was  to  be  placed  in 

I1*  Ibn  Hisham  1 :204. 

*2*  Ibn  Hisham  1 :207 . 


393 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  349)  ( Parti} 

its  designated  site.  A  dispute  erupted  between  the  various 
tribes  of  Quraysh,  each  seeking  the  honor  of  placing  the  Black 
Stone  for  their  own  tribe.  The  dispute  almost  led  to  violence 
between  the  leaders  of  Quraysh  in  the  area  of  the  Sacred 
House.  Banu  ‘Abd  Ad-Dar  and  Banu  ‘Adi  bin  Ka*b  bin  Lu’ay, 
gave  their  mutual  pledge  to  fight  until  death.  However,  five  or 
four  days  later,  Abu  Umayyah  bin  Al-Mughlrah  bin  ‘Abdullah 
bin  ‘Amr  bin  Makhzum,  the  oldest  man  from  Quraysh  then 
intervened  at  the  right  moment.  Abu  Umayyah  suggested  that 
Quraysh  should  appoint  the  first  man  to  enter  the  House  from 
its  entrance  to  be  a  mediator  between  them.  They  agreed. 

The  Messenger  -  Muhammad  -  was  the  first  person  to 
enter  the  House.  When  the  various  leaders  of  Quraysh  realized 
who  the  first  one  was,  they  all  proclaimed,  This  is  Al-Amin  (the 
Honest  one).  We  all  accept  him;  This  is  Muhammad.’  When  the 
Prophet  jg  reached  the  area  where  the  leaders  were  gathering 
and  they  informed  him  about  their  dispute,  he  asked  them  to 
bring  a  garment  and  place  it  on  the  ground.  He  placed  the 
Black  Stone  on  it.  He  then  requested  that  each  of  the  leaders  of 
Quraysh  hold  the  garment  from  one  side  and  all  participate  in 
lifting  the  Black  Stone,  moving  it  to  its  designated  area.  Next, 
the  Prophet  carried  the  Black  Stone  by  himself  and  placed  it 
in  its  designated  position  and  built  around  it.  The  Quraysh 
used  to  call  the  Messenger  of  Allah  ‘Al-Amin’  even  before  the 
revelation  came  to  him.” 

Ibn  Az-Zubayr  rebuilds  Al-Ka‘bah  the  way  the  Prophet 
wished 

Ibn  Ishaq  said,  “During  the  time  of  the  Prophet  the 
Ka‘bah  was  eighteen  cubits  high  and  was  covered  with 
Egyptian  linen,  and  they  with  a  striped  garment.  Al-Hajjaj  bin 
Yusuf  was  the  first  person  to  cover  it  with  silk.  ^ 11  The  Ka4bah 
remained  the  same  way  the  Quraysh  rebuilt  it,  until  it  was 
burned  during  the  reign  of  ‘Abdullah  bin  Az-Zubayr,  after  the 
year  60  H,  at  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Yazid  bin  Mu'awiyah. 
During  that  time,  Ibn  Az-Zubayr  was  besieged  at  Makkah. 
When  it  was  burned,  Ibn  Az-Zubayr  brought  the  Ka'bah  down 
and  built  it  upon  the  foundations  of  Ibrahim,  including  the  Hijr 


m 


Ibn  Hisham  1 :21 1 . 


394 


Ta  fsir  I bn  Kathir 

in  it.  He  also  made  an  eastern  door  and  a  western  door  in  the 
Ka'bah  and  placed  them  on  ground  level.  He  had  heard  his 
aunt  ‘A’ishah,  the  Mother  of  the  believers,  narrate  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  had  wished  that.  The  Ka'bah  remained 
like  this  throughout  his  reign,  until  Al-Hajjaj  killed  Ibn  A z- 
Zubayr  and  then  rebuilt  it  the  way  it  was  before,  by  the  order  of 
‘Abdul-Malik  bin  Marwan. 

Muslim  recorded  that  ‘Ata’  said,  “The  House  was  burnt 
during  the  reign  of  Yazld  bin  Mu'awiyah,  when  the  people  of 
Ash-Sham  raided  Makkah.  Ibn  Az-Zubayr  did  not  touch  the 
House  until  the  people  came  for  Hajj,  for  he  wanted  to  incite 
them  against  the  people  of  Ash-Sham.  He  said  to  them,  ‘O 
people!  Advise  me  regarding  the  Ka'bah,  should  we  bring  it 
down  and  rebuild  it,  or  just  repair  the  damage  it  sustained?’ 
Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  *1  have  an  opinion  about  this.  You  should 
rebuild  the  House  the  way  it  was  when  the  people  became 
Muslims.  You  should  leave  the  stones  that  existed  when  the 
people  became  Muslims  and  when  the  Prophet  jg  was  sent.’ 
Ibn  Az-Zubayr  said,  *If  the  house  of  one  of  them  gets  burned, 
he  will  not  be  satisfied,  until  he  rebuilds  it.  How  about  Allah’s 
House?  I  will  invoke  my  Lord  for  three  days  and  will  then 
implement  what  I  decide.’  When  the  three  days  had  passed,  he 
decided  to  bring  the  Ka'bah  down.  The  people  hesitated  to 
bring  it  down,  fearing  that  the  first  person  to  climb  on  the 
House  would  be  struck  down.  A  man  went  on  top  of  the  House 
and  threw  some  stones  down,  and  when  the  people  saw  that  no 
harm  touched  him,  they  started  doing  the  same.  They  brought 
the  House  down  to  ground  level.  Ibn  Az-Zubayr  surrounded  the 
site  with  curtains  hanging  from  pillars,  so  that  the  House 
would  be  covered,  until  the  building  was  erect.  Ibn  Az-Zubayr 
then  said,  1  heard  ‘A’ishah  say  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg 
said, 


*i&.  I iri  ‘  jUAf*  M"-  ,>&>  M 


i  >  > :  * 


•9  ^  was  not  for  the  fact  that  the  people  have  recently 
abandoned  disbelief,  and  that  I  do  not  have  enough  money  to 
spend  on  it,  I  would  have  included  in  the  House  five  cubits 


395 


Surah  2.  MSagarah  (125  - 149)  (Part-1) 


from  Al-Hijr  and  would  have  made  a  door  for  it  tlmt  people 
could  enter  from,  and  another  door  that  they  could  exit  from .» 

Ibn  Az-Zubayr  said,  1  can  spend  on  this  job,  and  I  do  not 
fear  the  people.’  So  he  added  five  cubits  from  the  Hijr,  which 
looked  like  a  rear  part  for  the  House  that  people  could  clearly 
see.  He  then  built  the  House  and  made  it  eighteen  cubits  high. 
He  thought  that  the  House  was  still  short  and  added  ten 
cubits  in  the  front  and  built  two  doors  in  it,  one  as  an 
entrance  and  another  as  an  exit. 


When  Ibn  Az-Zubayr  was  killed,  Al-Hajjaj  wrote  to  ‘Abdul- 
Malik  bin  Marwan  asking  him  about  the  House  and  told  him 
that  Ibn  Az-Zubayr  made  a  rear  section  for  the  House.  ‘Abdul- 
Malik  wrote  back,  *We  do  not  agree  with  Ibn  Az-Zubayr’s 
actions.  As,  for  the  Kabbah’s  height,  leave  it  as  it  is.  As  for 
what  he  added  from  the  Hijr,  bring  it  down,  and  build  the 
House  as  it  was  before  and  close  the  door.’  Therefore,  Al-Hajjaj 
brought  down  the  House  and  rebuilt  it  as  it  was.”111  In  his 
Sunan,  An-Nasa’i  collected  the  Hadith  of  the  Prophet 
narrated  from  ‘A’ishah,  not  the  whole  story,  121 
The  correct  Sunnah  conformed  to  Ibn  Az-Zubayr’s  actions, 
because  this  was  what  the  Prophet  5fe  wished  he  could  do,  but 
feared  that  the  hearts  of  the  people  who  recently  became 
Muslim  could  not  bear  rebuilding  the  House.  This  Sunnah  was 
not  clear  to  ‘Abdul-Malik  bin  Marwan.  Hence,  when  ‘Abdul- 
Malik  realized  that  ‘A’ishah  had  narrated  the  Hadith  of  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  on  this  subject,  he  said,  “I  wish  we  had 
left  it  as  Ibn  Az-Zubayr  had  made  it.”  Muslim  recorded  that 
‘Ubadydullah  bin  ‘Ubayd  said  that  Al-Harith  bin  ‘Abdullah 
came  to  ‘Abdul-Malik  bin  Marwan  during  his  reign.  ‘Abdul- 
Malik  said,  ‘I  did  not  think  that  Abu  Khubayb  (Ibn  Az-Zubayr) 
heard  from  ‘A’ishah  what  he  said  he  heard  from  her.’  Al-Harith 
said,  “Yes  he  did.  1  heard  the  Hadith  from  her.’  ‘Abdul-Malik 
said,  ‘You  heard  her  say  what?’  He  said,  ‘She  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


I  JUJ 


1  jS y  ii  oJtf  I  ll ijjJU  ~ 1 1 

y  L*  &&  1  °J~l  I  JO 


111  MusUm  2:970. 

121  An-Nasa’i  5:218. 


dVour  people  rebuilt  the  House  smaller.  Had  it  not  been  for  the 
fact  that  your  people  are  not  far  from  the  time  of  Shirk,  I  would 
add  what  was  left  outside  of  it.  If  your  people  afterwards  think 
about  rebuilding  it,  let  me  show  you  what  they  left  out  of  it .» 
He  showed  her  around  seven  cubits.’ 


One  of  the  narrators  of  the  Hadith,  Al-Walld  bin  ‘Ata’,  added 
that  the  Prophet  sg  said, 


vj  v  if  i#s» 


:  J15  :cJU  Ijiij 


oyiii  J>-Jb  ji  i\S  lil 


Lfpji  ^ oJ  Siji  3*  •*! 


»/  would  have  made  two  doors  for  the  House  on  ground  level, 
one  eastern  and  one  western.  Do  you  know  why  your  people 
raised  its  door  above  ground  level?*  She  said,  ‘No.’  He  said, 

"To  allow  only  those  whom  they  wanted  to  enter  it.  Wlten  a 
man  whom  they  did  not  wish  to  enter  the  House  climbed  to  the 
level  of  the  door,  they  would  push  him  down » 

‘Abdul-Malik  then  said,  *You  heard  ‘A’ishah  say  this  Hadith?’ 

He  said,  ‘Yes.’  ‘Abdul-Malik  said,  1  wish  I  left  it  as  it  was.”^1' 


An  Ethiopian  will  destroy  the  Kabbah  just  before  the 
Last  Hour 

The  Two  Sahihs  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 

3 4  I  ji  4_*53l  1 _ >  \>*J * 

“The  Ka'balt  will  be  destroyed  by  Dhus-Sawiqatayn  (literally,  a 
person  with  two  lean  legs)  from  Ethiopia. 

Also,  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  the  Prophet  jg  said, 

Sjil  *J 

"As  if  I  see  him  now :  a  black  person  with  thin  legs  plucking 
the  stones  of  the  Ka'bah  one  after  another .»  Al-Bukhari 


111  Muslim  2:971. 

•2|  Fath  Al-Bari  3 :538 ,  and  Muslim  4 :2232 . 


397 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149}  (Parti) 


recorded  this  HadEth.1'1 


Imam  Ahmad  bin  Hanbal  recorded  in  his  Musnad  that 
‘Abdullah  bin  ‘Amr  bin  Al-‘As  said  that  he  heard  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  say, 


jt  K& l 


« Dhus-Sawiqatayn  from  Ethiopia  will  destroy  the  Ka'bah  and 
will  loot  its  adornments  and  cover.  It  is  as  if  I  see  him  now: 
bald,  with  thin  legs  striking  the  Ka'bah  with  his  ax.»’21 


This  will  occur  after  the  appearance  of  Gog  and  Magog 
people.  Al-Bukhari  recorded  that  Abu  Said  Al-Khudri  said  that 
the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 

.  '  >{•'''  /  *  t*  >  ,  'I*''*  %\+  *  *<■]  ■  S  S  x  $ * 

gyrk  £jj=-  c_Ji 

uThere  will  be  Hajj  and  ‘ Uttirah  to  the  House  after  the 
appearance  of  Gog  and  Magog  peopled 


Al-Khaltl’s  Supplication 

Allah  said  that  Ibrahim  and  Ismail  supplicated  to  Him, 


■J  l 'SLJG.  £&  a  LlZ  b\  Si  Liiib 


J)\  A,0\ 


“ Our  Lord!  And  make  us  submissive  unto  You  and  of  our 
offspring  a  nation  submissive  unto  You,  and  show  us  our 
Mandsik,  and  accept  our  repentance.  Truly,  You  are  the  One 
Who  accepts  repentance,  the  Most  Merciful > 

Ibn  Jarir  said,  “They  meant  by  their  supplication,  ‘Make  us 
submit  to  Your  command  and  obedience  and  not  associate 
anyone  with  You  in  obedience  or  worship.  ”,4)  Also,  Ikrimah 
commented  on  the  Ayah, 

jCx—" 


iOur  Lord!  And  make  us  submissive  unto  You > 

111  Fath  Al-Bari  3 :538 . 

121  Ahmad  2:220. 

131  Fath  Al-Bari  3:531. 

141  At-Tabari  3 :73 . 


398 


Tafsir  7 bn  Kathir 


“Allah  said,  *1  shall  do  that.’” 

tcs  b\  ^} 


iAttd  of  our  offspring  a  nation  submissive  unto  You} 


Allah  said,  ‘1  shall  do  that."' 

This  supplication  by  Ibrahim  and  Ismail  is  similar  to  what 
Allah  informed  us  of  about  His  believing  servants, 


4And  those  who  say :  'Our  Lord!  Bestow  on  us  from  our  wives 
and  our  offspring  the  comfort  of  our  eyes,  and  make  us  leaders 
of  the  Muttaqin}  (25:74). 

This  type  of  supplication  is  allowed,  because  loving  to  have 
offspring  who  worship  Allah  alone  without  partners  is  a  sign  of 
complete  love  of  Allah.  This  is  why  when  Allah  said  to  Ibrahim, 

u-il) J 


iVerily,  I  am  going  to  make  you  an  Imam  (a  leader)  for 
mankind  (to  follow  you)}  Ibrahim  said, 

4 fS-Yv-  't  irtj} 

4" And  of  my  offspring  (to  make  leaders)."  (Allah)  said,  “My 
covenant  (propliethood)  includes  not  the  Zdlimin  (polytheists 
and  wrongdoers)"}  which  is  explained  by, 


4And  keep  me  and  my  sons  aiuay  from  worshipping  idols} 

Muslim  narrated  in  his  Sahih  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that 
the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


jJj  jl  Xj  pip  f  yXp  !  xJL^P  h  1  pji  ^,1 

*;  > 


:i  ou  iiu 


•ij  Ji; 


’‘When  the  son  of  Adam  dies,  his  deeds  end  except  for  three 
deeds:  an  ongoing  charity,  a  knowledge  that  is  being  benefited 
from  and  a  righteous  son  who  supplicates  (to  Allah)  for  him  .x11' 


PI 


Muslim  3 : 1255. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149)  (Part-1) 


399 


The  Meaning  of  Manasik 

Said  bin  Mansur  said  that  ‘Attab  bin  Bashir  informed  us 
from  Khaslf,  from  Mujahid  who  said,  “The  Prophet  Ibrahim 
supplicated, 

41&-C  ££► 


iand  show  us  our  Manasik ^ 


Jibril  then  came  down,  took  him  to  the  House  and  said,  ‘Raise 
its  foundations.’  Ibrahim  raised  the  House’s  foundations  and 
completed  the  building.  Jibril  held  Ibrahim’s  hand,  led  him  to 
As-Safa  and  said,  This  is  among  the  rituals  of  Allah.’  He  then 
took  him  to  Al-Marwah  and  said,  ‘And  this  is  among  the 
rituals  of  Allah.’  He  then  took  him  to  Mina  until  when  they 
reached  the  ‘Aqabah,  they  found  Iblls  standing  next  to  a  tree. 
Jibril  said,  ‘Say  Takbir  (Allah  is  the  Great)  and  throw  (pebbles) 
at  him.’  Ibrahim  said  the  Takbir  and  threw  (pebbles  at)  Iblls. 
Iblls  moved  to  the  middle  Jamrah,  and  when  Jibril  and 
Ibrahim  passed  by  him,  Jibril  said  to  Ibrahim,  ‘Say  Takbir  and 
throw  at  him.’  Ibrahim  threw  at  him  and  said  Takbir.  The 
devious  Iblls  sought  to  add  some  evil  acts  to  the  rituals  of 
Hajj,  but  he  was  unable  to  succeed.  Jibril  took  Ibrahim’s  hand 
and  led  him  to  Al-Mash‘ar  Al-Haram  and  ‘Arafat  and  said  to 
him,  ‘Have  you  ‘Arafta  (known,  learned)  what  I  showed  you?’ 
thrice.  Ibrahim  said,  *Yes  I  did.’”*1*  Similar  statements  were 
reported  from  Abu  Mijlaz  and  Qatadah.*2* 


rrf-Xi  (>-&■  ijk;  fri  (i+j 

4  Jyjiif  cJs  Idi 


4129.  " Our  Lord!  Send  amongst  than  a  Messenger  of  their 
oton,  who  shall  recite  unto  them  Your  verses  and  instruct  them 
in  the  Book  (this  Qur’an),  and  purify  them.  Verily,  You  are  the 
Mighty,  the  Wise. "4 


Ibrahim’s  Supplication  that  Allah  sends  the  Prophet  ^ 

Allah  mentioned  Ibrahim’s  supplication  for  the  benefit  of  the 
people  of  the  Sacred  Area  (to  grant  them  security  and 


*!*  Said  Bin  MansQr  2:615. 
121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :387. 


400 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


provision),  and  it  was  perfected  by  invoking  Allah  to  send  a 
Messenger  from  his  offspring.  This  accepted  supplication,  from 
Ibrahim,  conformed  with  Allah’s  appointed  destiny  that 
Muhammad  gg  be  sent  as  a  Messenger  among  the  Ummiyyin 
and  to  all  non-Arabs,  among  the  Jinns  and  mankind. 

Hence,  Ibrahim  was  the  first  person  to  mention  the  Prophet 
SS  to  the  people.  Ever  since,  Muhammad  sfe  was  known  to  the 
people,  until  the  last  Prophet  was  sent  among  the  Children  of 
Israel,  Jesus  the  son  of  Mary,  who  mentioned  Muhammad 
by  name.  Jesus  addressed  the  Children  of  Israel  saying, 


^  ^  y  >  ^ 

Ot  irt  uj* 


41  am  the  Messenger  of  Allah  unto  you ,  confirming  wlmt  is 
before  me  in  the  Tawrdh,  and  giving  glad  tidings  of  a 
Messenger  to  come  after  me ,  zvhose  name  shall  be  Ahmad} 
(61:6) 

This  is  why  the  Prophet  sg  said  , 


«77ie  supplication  of  my  father  Ibrahim  and  the  glad  tidings 
brought  forth  by  }esus  the  son  of  Mary. ^ 


The  Prophet  sg  said, 


g ** Li] I  jjj  ^  \ jj ^ 


flMy  mother  saw  a  light  that  went  out  of  her  and  radiated  the 
palaces  of  Ash-Sham .  ^21 


It  was  said  that  the  Prophet’s  mother  saw  this  vision  when 
she  was  pregnant  with,  narrated  this  vision  to  her  people,  and 
the  story  became  popular  among  them.  The  light  mentioned  in 
the  Hadith  appeared  in  Ash-Sham  (Greater  Syria),  testifying  to 
what  will  later  occur  when  the  Prophet’s  religion  will  be  firmly 
established  in  Ash-Sham  area.  This  is  why  by  the  end  of  time, 
Ash-Sham  will  be  a  refuge  for  Islam  and  its  people.  Also, 
Jesus  the  son  of  Mary  will  descend  in  Ash-Sham,  next  to  the 
eastern  white  minaret  in  Damascus.  The  Two  Sahxhs  stated, 


^  ^  N  j>Ji  JU  J>\  j,  2s>  Ji>: 


^  As-Sahihah  nos.  1546  and  1925. 
121  Ahmad  5:262. 


401 


Surah  2.  MMqarah  (125  -  149}  (Part-1) 

« There  will  always  be  a  group  of  my  Ummah  who  will  be  on 
the  truth,  undeterred  by  those  who  fail  or  oppose  them,  until 
the  command  of  Allah  comes  while  they  are  on  this." 

Al-Bukhari  added  in  his  Sahih,  ^And  they  will  reside  in  Ash- 
Sham V11 


The  Meaning  of  Al-Kitab  wal-Hikmah 

Allah  said, 

iand  instruct  them  in  the  Book}  meaning,  Al-Qur’an, 


iand  Al-Hikmah}  meaning,  the  Sunnah,  as  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah, 
Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  and  Abu  Malik  asserted.'2*  It  was  also  said 
that  ‘Al-Hikmah’,  means  ‘comprehension  in  the  religion’,  and 
both  meanings  are  correct.  ‘Ali  bin  Abi  Talhah  said,  that  Ibn 
‘Abbas  said  that, 


iand  purify  them}  means,  “With  the  obedience  of  Allah.”'3* 


iJj&i  cA  till' ^ 


iVerily,  You  are  the  Mighty,  the  Wi'sc^. 

This  Ayah  stated  that  Allah  is  able  to  do  anything,  and 
nothing  escapes  His  ability.  He  is  Wise  in  His  decisions,  His 
actions,  and  He  puts  everything  in  its  rightful  place  due  to  His 
perfect  knowledge,  wisdom  and  justice. 


•  j  fSij  Q" iif  j  jlij  }  la  V]  jii  iy  ■ _ yY} 

^  5^4  i  ,**  J^4  H  ,\T‘ 


il30.  And  who  turns  away  from  the  religion  of  Ibrahim  (i.e. 

1 1 1  Fath  Al-Bari  6 :73 1  and  Muslim  2  : 1 524 . 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :390. 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :391 . 


402 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kqthir 

Islamic  Monotheism)  except  him  who  fools  himself?  Truly,  We 
chose  him  in  this  world  and  verily,  in  the  Hereafter  he  will  be 
among  the  righteous}. 

4131.  When  his  Lord  said  to  him,  "Subtnit  (i.e.  be  a 
Muslim)!”  He  said,  "I  have  submitted  myself  (as  a  Muslim)  to 
the  Lord  of  the  'Alamin  (mankind,  Jinn  and  all  that  exists).”} 

4132.  And  this  (submission  to  Allah,  Islam)  was  enjoined  by 
Ibrahim  (Abraham)  upon  his  sons  and  by  Ya'qub  (Jacob) 
(saying),  “O  my  sons!  Allah  has  chosen  for  you  the  (true) 
religion,  then  die  not  except  as  Muslims.”} 


Only  the  Pools  deviate  from  Ibrahim’s  Religion 

Allah  refuted  the  disbelievers’  innovations  of  associating 
others  with  Allah  in  defiance  of  the  religion  of  Ibrahim,  the 
leader  of  the  upright.  Ibrahim  always  singled  out  Allah  in 
worship,  with  sincerity,  and  he  did  not  call  upon  others 
besides  Allah.  He  did  not  commit  Shirk,  even  for  an  instant. 
He  disowned  every  other  deity  that  was  being  worshipped 
instead  of  Allah  and  defied  all  his  people  in  this  regard. 
Prophet  Ibrahim  said, 


yy  jlQi  lii  "xsj.  /&.} 

ft  iLi 


40  my  people!  I  am  indeed  free  from  all  that  you  join  as 
partners  (in  worship  with  Allah).  Verily,  I  have  turned  my  face 
towards  Him  Wlw  has  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth  Hanifa 
(Islamic  Monotheism),  and  I  am  not  of  Al-Mushrikin .}  (6:78- 
79).  Also,  Allah  said, 


(Ofi  li i  I&l  J&  >$} 

4And  (remember)  when  Ibrahim  said  to  his  father  and  his 
people:  " Verily ,  I  am  innocent  of  what  you  worship.  "Except 
Him  (i.e.  I  worship  none  but  Allah  alone)  Who  did  create  me; 
and  verily.  He  will  guide  me”}  (43:26-27), 


403 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149 )  (Part-1) 


}And  Ibrahim’s  invoking  (of  Allah)  for  his  father's  forgiveness 
was  only  because  of  a  promise  he  (Ibrahim)  had  made  to  him 
(his  father).  But  when  it  became  clear  to  him  (Ibrahim)  that  he 
(his  father)  was  an  enemy  of  Allah,  he  dissociated  himself  from 
him.  Verily,  Ibrahim  was  Awwah  (one  zvho  invokes  Allah  with 
humility,  glorifies  Him  and  remembers  Him  much)  and  was 
forbearing }  (9:114),  and, 


UV  iS  U  4  jjj  fe.  £  \&  &  ££  %} 

4  .'v 


iVerily,  Ibrahim  zvas  an  Ummah  (a  leader  having  all  the  good 
qualities,  or  a  nation),  obedient  to  Allah,  Hanif  (i.e.  to  zvorship 
none  but  Allah),  and  he  was  not  one  of  those  who  were  Al- 
Mushrikin.  (He  was)  thankful  for  His  (Allah's)  favors.  He 
(Allah)  chose  him  (as  an  intimate  friend)  and  guided  him  to  a 
straight  path.  And  We  gave  him  good  in  this  world,  and  in  the 
Hereafter  he  shall  be  of  the  righteous (16:120-122). 

This  is  why  Allah  said  here, 

&  if  ^fy  iff} 


iAnd  who  turns  away  from  the  religion  of  Ibrahim},  meaning, 
abandons  his  path,  way  and  method 

if  ^)} 

4 except  him  zoho  fools  himself}  meaning,  who  commits  injustice 
against  himself  by  deviating  from  the  truth,  to  wickedness. 
Such  a  person  will  be  defying  the  path  of  he  who  was  chosen  in 
this  life  to  be  a  true  Imam,  from  the  time  he  was  young,  until 
Allah  chose  him  to  be  His  Khalil,  and  who  shall  be  among  the 
successful  in  the  Last  Life.  Is  there  anything  more  insane  than 
deviating  from  this  path  and  following  the  path  of  misguidance 
and  deviation  instead?  Is  there  more  injustice  than  this?  Allah 
said, 

4  Verily,  joining  others  in  worship  with  Allah  is  a  great  Zulm 
(wrong)  indeed}  (31:13). 

Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  and  Qatadah  said,  “This  Ayah  (2:130)  was 
revealed  about  the  Jews  who  invented  a  practice  that  did  not 


404 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


come  from  Allah  and  that  defied  the  religion  of  Ibrahim.”*1* 
Allah’s  statement. 


4:v:^*  $  %  fa:  fo;  &sr  sJj  ^  jtf 


ilbrahim  was  neither  a  Jew  nor  a  Christian,  but  he  was  a  true 
Muslim  Hanifa  (to  worship  none  but  Allah  alone)  and  he  was 
not  of  Al-Mushrikin .  Verily,  among  mankind  who  have  the  best 
claim  to  Ibrahim  are  those  who  followed  him,  and  this  Prophet 
(Muhammad  jg)  and  those  who  have  believed  (Muslims).  And 
Allah  is  the  Wall  (Protector  and  Helper)  of  the  believers.} 
(3:67-68),  testifies  to  this  fact. 

Allah  said  next, 


0  oil  J\5  ju 


iWheti  his  Lord  said  to  him,  " Submit  (i.e.  be  a  Muslim)!"  He 
said,  "I  have  submitted  myself  (as  a  Muslim)  to  the  Lord  of  the 
‘ Alamin  (mankind,  Jinn  and  all  that  exists)."} 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  Allah  commanded  Ibrahim  to  be 
sincere  with  Him  and  to  abide  and  submit  to  Him;  Ibrahim 
perfectly  adhered  to  Allah’s  command.  Allah’s  statement, 


4  And  this  (submission  to  Allah,  Islam)  was  enjoined  by  Ibrahim 
upon  his  sons  and  by  Ya'qub} 

means,  Ibrahim  commanded  his  offspring  to  follow  this 
religion,  that  is,  Islam,  for  Allah.  Or,  the  Ayah  might  be 
referring  to  Ibrahim’s  words, 

CJ)  J^js)} 


41  have  submitted  myself  (as  a  Muslim)  to  the  Lord  of  the 
'Alamin  (mankind.  Jinn  and  all  that  exists)}. 

This  means  that  these  Prophets  loved  these  words  so  much  that 
they  preserved  them  until  the  time  of  death  and  advised  their 
children  to  adhere  to  them  after  them.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 

4  £iC  'iltt  \4ilZj} 


***  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :392. 


405 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149}  Parti l 


4 And  he  (Ibrahim)  made  it  [i.e.  La  ildha  Wallah  (none  has  the 
right  to  be  worshipped  but  Allah  alone)]  a  Word  lasting  among 
his  offspring,  (true  Monotheism )}  (43:28). 

It  might  be  that  Ibrahim  advised  his  children,  including 
Jacob,  Isaac’s  son,  who  were  present.  It  appears,  and  Allah 
knows  best,  that  Isaac  was  endowed  with  Jacob,  during  the 
lifetime  of  Ibrahim  and  Sarah,  for  the  good  news  includes  both 
of  them  in  Allah’s  statement, 


4But  We  gave  her  (Sarah)  glad  tidings  of  Islidq  (Isaac),  and 
after  Ishaq,  of  Ya'qub  (Jacob)}  (11:71). 

Also,  if  Jacob  was  not  alive  then,  there  would  be  no  use 
here  in  mentioning  him  specifically  among  Isaac’s  children. 
Also,  Allah  said  in  Surat  Al-'Ankabut, 


4And  We  bestowed  on  him  (Ibrahim),  Ishaq  and  Ya'qub,  and 
We  ordained  among  his  offspring  prophethood  and  the  Book.} 
(29:27),  and, 


4  iijb  vl’jjjJj  i<J  ' 


4And  We  bestowed  upon  him  Ishaq,  and  (a  grandson)  Ya'qiib} 
(21:72),  thus,  indicating  that  this  occurred  during  Ibrahim’s 
lifetime.  Also,  Jacob  built  Bayt  Al-Maqdis,  as  earlier  books 
testified.  The  Two  Sahihs  recorded  that  Abu  Dharr  said,  “I  said, 
‘O  Messenger  of  Allah!  Which  Masjid  was  built  first?’  He  said, 
aAl-Masjid  Al-Haram  (Al-Ka'bah) .»  I  said,  Then?’  He  said,  iBayt 
Al-  MaqdisJ  I  said,  ‘How  many  years  later?’  He  said,  « Forty 
years. »”***  Further,  the  advice  that  Jacob  gave  to  his  children, 
which  we  will  soon  mention,  testifies  that  Jacob  was  among 
those  who  received  the  advice  mentioned  in  Ayat  above  (2:  ISO- 
132). 


Adhering  to  Tawhid  until  Death 

Allah  said, 


iljxl  JAj  -3)  •%  ft  l\  Ijft} 


'l'  Fath  Al-Bari  6 :469 ,  and  Muslim  1 :370. 


406 


Tafsir  Ibtt  Kathir 


i(Saying),  "O  my  sons!  Allah  has  chosen  for  you  the  (true) 
religion,  then  die  not  except  as  Muslims."} 


meaning,  perform  righteous  deeds  during  your  lifetime  and 
remain  on  this  path,  so  that  Allah  will  endow  you  with  the 
favor  of  dying  upon  it.  Usually,  one  dies  upon  the  path  that  he 
lived  on  and  is  resurrected  according  to  what  he  died  on. 
Allah,  the  Most  Generous,  helps  those  who  seek  to  do  good 
deeds  to  remain  on  the  righteous  path. 

This  by  no  means  contradicts  the  authentic  Hadith  that 
says, 


Jr—r*  ff/i  jt  443  *4  Oj&  i  jit  Ji»J  Jip  Jrv"  ^!* 

j&i  jaI  j^,  jui  jf‘j\  Uj  .  jiln  jit  jul  j 14  4&3i 4* 

jit  4-^'  44  ^4  &  j\  If.  443  ijfc  u  > 


«M««  might  perform  the  works  of  the  people  of  Paradise  until 
only  a  span  of  outstretched  arms  or  a  cubit  separates  him  from  it, 
then  the  Book  (destiny)  takes  precedence,  and  he  performs  the 
works  of  the  people  of  the  Fire  and  thus  enters  it.  Also,  man 
might  perform  tlte  works  of  the  people  of  the  Fire  until  only  a 
span  of  outstretched  artns  or  a  cubit  separates  him  from  tlte  Fire, 
but  the  Book  takes  precedence  and  he  performs  the  works  of  the 
people  of  Paradise  and  thus  enters  if.nl1'  Allah  said,  (92:5-10), 


%  £  Clj  ©<£8  iPj  Qft  Jit  J  &} 


wP  ©Pi 


4 As  for  him  who  gives  (in  charity)  and  keeps  his  duty  to  Allah 
and  fears  Him.  And  believes  in  Al-Husna.  We  will  make 
smooth  for  him  tlte  path  of  ease  (goodness).  But  he  who  is  a 
greedy  miser  and  thinks  himself  self-sufficient.  And  belies  Al- 
Husna  (none  has  the  right  to  be  worshipped  except  Allah).  We 
will  make  smooth  for  him  the  path  for  evil}, 


JLji  lj)\»  [j*  U  A.Jl J  Jld 

vb  Ms  ft  o <k 


111  FathAl-Bari  6: 105. 


407 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149)  (Part-1) 


-Jj  iir  u  V^j  i3fc  ^ 


4233.  Or  were  j/oh  witnesses  when  death  approached  Ya'qub 
(Jacob)?  When  he  said  unto  his  sons,  "What  will  you  worship 
after  me?"  They  said,  "We  shall  worship  your  Allah  (God  - 
Allah)  the  Iidh  of  your  fathers,  Ibrahim  (Abraham),  Isma'il 
(Ishtnael),  Ishaq  (Isaac),  One  Iidh,  and  to  Him  ive  submit  (in 
Islam)).’’ 

4134.  That  ivas  a  nation  who  has  passed  aivay.  They  shall 
receive  the  reivard  of  what  they  earned  and  you  of  what  you 
earn.  And  you  will  not  be  asked  of  what  they  used  to  do.) 


Ya'qub’s  Will  and  Testament  to  His  Children  upon  His 
Death 


This  Ayah  contains  Allah’s  criticism  of  the  Arab  pagans 
among  the  offspring  of  Isma'il  as  well  as  the  disbelievers 
among  the  Children  of  Israel  Jacob  the  son  of  Isaac,  the  son 
of  Ibrahim.  When  death  came  to  Jacob,  he  advised  his 
children  to  worship  Allah  alone  without  partners.  He  said  to 
them, 


'..it'  ii'.n 


4"What  will  you  worship  after  me?"  They  said,  "We  shall 
worship  your  lldh  (God  -  Allah)  the  Hah  of  your  fathers, 
Ibrahim,  Isma'il,  Islidq,"  ) 

Mentioning  Isma'il  here  is  a  figure  of  speech,  because  Isma'il 
is  Jacob’s  uncle.  An-Nahas  said  that  the  Arabs  call  the  uncle 
a  father,  as  Al-Qurtubi  mentioned^.1*1 
This  Ayah  is  used  as  evidence  that  the  grandfather  is  called 
a  father  and  inherits,  rather  than  the  brothers  (i.e.  when  his 
son  dies),  as  Abu  Bakr  asserted,  according  to  Al-Bukhari  who 
narrated  Abu  Bakr’s  statement  from  Ibn  'Abbas  and  Ibn  A z- 
Zubayr.  Al-Bukhari  then  commented  that  there  are  no 
opposing  opinions  regarding  this  subject.121  This  is  also  the 
opinion  of  ‘A’ishah  the  Mother  of  the  believers,  Al-Hasan  Al- 
Basri,  Tawus  and  ‘Ata’,  Malik,  Ash-Shafi  and  Ahmad  said  that 


111  Al-Qurtubi  2:138. 
121  Path  Al-B&ri  12:19. 


408 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

the  inheritance  is  divided  between  the  grandfather  and  the 
brothers.  It  was  reported  that  this  was  also  the  opinion  of 
'Umar,  XJthman,  ‘Ali,  bin  Mas'ud,  Zayd  bin  Thabit  and  several 
scholars  among  the  Salaf  and  later  generations. 

The  statement, 


40ne  Ildh  (God)}  means,  “We  single  Him  out  in  divinity  and  do 
not  associate  anything  or  anyone  with  Him.” 


4 And  to  Him  we  submit},  in  obedience  meaning,  obedient  and 
submissiveness.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


4  6  r'Jj} 


iWhile  to  Him  submitted  all  creatures  in  the  heavens  and  the 
earth,  willingly  or  unwillingly.  And  to  Him  shall  they  all  be 
returned}  (3:83). 


Indeed,  Islam  is  the  religion  of  all  the  Prophets,  even  if  their 
respective  laws  differed.  Allah  said, 


'0  V<  %  V  %  Vi  oi  ot 


4 And  We  did  not  send  any  Messenger  before  you  (O 
Muhammad  jfej  [but  We  revealed  to  him  (saying) :  Ld  ildha  ilia 
Ana  [none  has  the  right  to  be  ivorsltipped  but  I  (Allah)],  so 
worship  Me  (alone  and  none  else)}  (21:25). 

There  are  many  other  Ayat  -  and  Hadiths  -  on  this  subject. 
For  instance,  the  Prophet  jg  said, 

ojU-I j  uLj  ivji  .uJVl 

“We,  the  Prophets,  are  brothers  with  different  mothers,  but  the 
same  religion .s'11 

Allah  said, 

&  Xii} 


4That  was  a  nation  who  has  passed  away}  meaning,  existed  before 
your  time, 


m 


Ahmad  2:319. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149}  ( Parti ) 


409 


4'^  a 

477iei/  shall  receive  the  reward  of  ivluit  they  earned  and  you  of 
what  you  earn). 

This  Ayah  proclaims,  Your  relationship  to  the  Prophets  or 
righteous  people  among  your  ancestors  will  not  benefit  you, 
unless  you  perform  good  deeds  that  bring  about  you  religious 
benefit.  They  have  their  deeds  and  you  have  yours, 

4 And  you  will  not  be  asked  of  what  they  used  to  do}.” 

This  is  why  a  Hadith  proclaims, 


4j  4j  iL 


'‘Whoever  was  slowed  on  account  of  his  deeds  will  not  get  any 
faster  on  account  of  his  family  lineage 


& 


4135.  And  they  say,  "Be  Jews  or  Christians,  then  you  will  be 
guided."  Say  (to  them  O  Muhammad  j&),  "Nay,  (ive  fallow) 
only  the  religion  of  Ibrahim ,  Hanif  (Islamic  Monotheism),  and 
he  was  not  of  Al-Mushrikin  (those  wlw  worshipped  others  along 
with  Allah.} 

Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that 
‘Abdullah  bin  Suriya  Al-A*war  said  to  the  Messenger  of  Allah, 
“The  guidance  is  only  what  we  (Jews)  follow.  Therefore,  follow 
us,  O  Muhammad,  and  you  will  be  rightly  guided.”  Also,  the 
Christians  said  similarly,  so  Allah  revealed, 

4  'Sji 


4And  they  say,  "Be  Jews  or  Christians,  then  you  will  be 
guided ."y2^  Allah’s  statement, 


4^e- 


111  Muslim  4:2074. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :397. 


_ Tafsir  Ibn  Kqthir 

iSay  (to  them  O 
Muhammad  3g),  "Nay, 
(we  follow)  only  the 
religion  of  Ibrahim, 
Hanif}  means,  “We  do 
not  need  the  Judaism 
or  Christianity  that 
you  call  us  to,  rather, 

i'k*- 

i(we  follow)  only  the 
religion  of  Ibrahim, 
Hanifo  meaning,  on 
the  straight  path,  as 
Muhammad  bin  Ka*b 
Al-Qurazi  and  ‘Isa  bin 
Jariyah  stated.111 
Also,  Abu  Qilabah 
said,  “The  Hanlf  is 
what  the  Messengers, 
from  beginning  to 
end,  believed  in/’121 

<4\  ty 

ill 

4136.  Sfli/  (O  Muslims):  "We  believe  in  Allah  and  that  which 
has  been  sent  down  to  us  and  that  which  has  been  sent  down  to 
Ibrahim  (Abraham),  Ismd'il  (Ishmael),  Ishaq  (Isaac),  Ya'qub 
(Jacob),  and  to  Al-Asbdt  (the  offspring  of  the  twelve  sons  of 
Ya'qub),  and  that  which  has  been  given  to  Musa  (Moses)  and 
'Isa  (Jesus),  and  that  which  has  been  given  to  the  Prophets  from 
their  Lord.  We  make  no  distinction  between  any  of  them,  and  to 
Hitn  we  have  submitted  (in  Islam).”} 

111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :397. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :397. 


0  mm ” T\  V: 

jzpj.  J?  3* 

C>Juoj 

**  *  «  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  “**  ^ 

Uu'jSjJo^}  IjJCJbl  Jjl3  ^ 

dii jjlit  \  lV  (s 

4jli\  lij  o  Jk  £^>^5^1-5  £r*J 

*  ✓  \s  •'.s’  S  .  .  -f 

c  *lJSL*UL  ok-  ifl  a»i  dftj  Jjip  ■*> 

jkij 


-i  * .<  .  "•  t  iv*  ,  ✓  ->  k  />  > 

y ^  oyj  j  cr!  «3j*  v»j 


Surah  2.  ATBaganzh  (125  -  149 )  (Parti) 


411 


The  Muslim  believes  in  all  that  Allah  'revealed  and  all 
the  Prophets 

Allah  directed  His  believing  servants  to  believe  in  what  He 
sent  down  to  them  through  His  Messenger  Muhammad  and 
in  what  was  revealed  to  the  previous  Prophets  in  general.  Some 
Prophets  Allah  mentioned  by  name,  while  He  did  not  mention 
the  names  of  many  others.  Allah  directed  the  believers  to 
refrain  from  differentiating  between  the  Prophets  and  to  believe 
in  them  all.  They  should  avoid  imitating  whomever  Allah 
described  as, 


'  >  M  /l  _ A  >  'y  ' 


uv  yyi  o'  'JJrVJ  r 

ol 


iAnd  zoish  to  make  distinction  between  Allah  and  His 
Messengers  (by  believing  in  Allah  and  disbelieving  in  His 
Messengers)  saying,  " We  believe  in  some  but  reject  others," 
and  zvisli  to  adopt  a  zoay  in  betzveen.  They  are  in  truth 
disbelievers ^  (4: 1 50- 151). 


Al-Bukhari  narrated  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said,  “The  People  of 
the  Book  used  to  read  the  Torah  in  Hebrew  and  translate  it 
into  Arabic  for  the  Muslims.  The  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


«£JI  J>{  Uj  jiL  liii  :  i'j  v&3l  Jif  V» 


•Do  not  believe  the  People  of  the  Book,  nor  reject  zohat  they 
say .  Rather ,  say,  I'Ve  believe  in  Allah  and  in  zohat  zoas  sent 
down  to  hs.»”,1) 


Also,  Muslim,  Abu  Dawud  and  An-Nasal  recorded  that  Ibn 
‘Abbas  said,  “Mostly,  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  used  to  recite, 

ty 

<$We  believe  in  Allah  and  that  which  has  been  sent  doion  to  us } 
(2:136),  and, 


vj,1  g  it 

iWe  believe  in  Allah,  and  bear  witness  that  zoe  are  Muslims 
(i.e.  zoe  submit  to  Allah)}  (3:52)  during  the  two  (voluntary) 

m 


Fath  Al-Bari  8  :20 . 


41 2 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Rak'at  before  Fcyr.”*1' 


Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Ar-Rabl'  and  Qatadah  said.  “Al-Asbat  are  the 
twelve  sons  of  Jacob,  and  each  one  of  them  had  an  Ummah  of 
people  from  his  descendants.  This  is  why  they  were  called  Al- 
Asbat.”*2'  Al- Khalil  bin  Ahmad  and  others  said,  “ Al-Asbat 
among  the  Children  of  Israel  are  just  like  the  tribes  among  the 
Children  of  Ismail.”  This  means  that  the  Asbat  are  the  various 
tribes  of  the  Children  of  Israel,  among  whom  Allah  sent  severed 
Prophets.  Moses  said  to  the  Children  of  Israel, 


p  3^ ; I  4*  £4 


iRemetnber  the  favor  of  Alldlt  to  you :  when  He  made  Prophets 
among  you,  made  you  kings}  (5:20).  Also,  Allah  said, 


iAnd  VJe  divided  them  into  twelve  tribes }  (7:160). 

Al-Qurtubi  said,  “ Sibt  is  the  group  of  people  or  a  tribe  all 
belonging  to  the  same  ancestors.”*3’ 

Qatadah  said,  “Allah  commanded  the  believers  to  believe  in 
Him  and  in  all  His  Books  and  Messengers.”*4’  Also,  Sulayman 
bin  Habib  said,  “We  were  commanded  to  believe  in  the 
(original)  Torah  and  InjH,  but  not  to  implement  them.”’5’ 

jhy  4i)l  Viji  Ijly  Jjy  ***  b 


4137.  So  i/  they  believe  in  the  like  of  that  which  you  believe 
then  they  are  rightly  guided;  but  if  they  turn  away,  then  they 
are  only  in  opposition.  So  Allah  will  suffice  for  you  against 
them.  And  He  is  the  Hearer,  the  Knower .} 

4138.  [Our  Sibghah  (religion)  is]  the  Sibghah  of  Allah  (Islam) 
and  which  Sibghah  can  be  better  than  Allah’s?  And  we  are  His 
worshippers.} 


*'*  Muslim  1 :502,  Abu  Dawud  2  :46,  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  6:339. 
*2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :399. 

131  Al-Qurtubi  2:141. 

*4’  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :400. 

*5’  Ibid. 


413 


Surah  2.  Al^Bagnrah  (125  -  149 )  (Parti} 


Allah  said,  if  they,  the  disbelievers  among  the  People  of  the 
Book  and  other  disbelievers,  believe  in  all  of  Allah’s  Books  and 
Messengers  and  do  not  differentiate  between  any  of  them, 

ithett  they  are  rightly  guided »  meaning,  they  would  acquire  the 
truth  and  be  directed  to  it. 

ibut  if  they  turn  away }  from  truth  to  falsehood  after  proof  had 
been  presented  to  them, 

4 then  they  are  only  in  opposition.  So  Allah  will  suffice  you  against 
them >  meaning,  Allah  will  aid  the  believers  against  them, 

4And  He  is  the  Hearer,  the  Knower >.  Allah  said, 

4The  Sibghah  of  Allah >.  Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
commented,  “The  religion  of  Allah.”111  This  Tafsir  was  also 
reported  of  Mujahid,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  ‘Ikrimah,  Ibrahim,  Al- 
Hasan,  Qatadah,  Ad-Dahhak,  ‘Abdullah  bin  Kathlr,  ‘Atiyah  Al- 
‘Awfi,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas,  As-Suddi  and  other  scholars.121  The 
Ayah, 


4 Allah’s  Fitrah  (i.e.  Allah's  Islamic  Monotheism )}  (30:30)  directs 
Muslims  to,  “Hold  to  it.” 


$  &  pcX\  p;  uj  pUjj  dj  %  &  4  ejffi  & 

ji  j'  '•>_>*  IjiK"  j  -A 

^  /fc*  &  &  f  p  jgfc 

4 


^  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :402. 
^  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :403 . 


414 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

4139.  Say  (O  Muhammad  jg  to  the  ]ews  and  Christians), 
"Dispute  you  with  us  about  Allah  while  He  is  our  Lord  and 
your  Lord?  And  we  are  to  be  rewarded  for  our  deeds  and  you 
for  your  deeds.  And  we  are  sincere  to  Him  (i.e.  we  worship 
Him  alone  and  none  else,  and  we  obey  His  orders)."} 

4140.  Or  say  you  that  Ibrahim,  Ismd'il,  Ishaq,  Ya'qub  and  Al- 
Asbdt,  were  Jews  or  Christians?  Say,  "Do  you  know  better  or 
does  Allah?  And  who  is  more  unjust  than  he  who  conceals  the 
testimony  he  has  from  Allah?  And  Allah  is  not  unaware  of 
what  you  do."} 

4141.  That  ivas  a  nation  ivho  has  passed  away.  They  shall 
receive  the  reward  of  what  they  earned,  and  you  of  what  you 
earn.  And  you  will  not  be  asked  of  what  they  used  to  do.} 

Allah  directed  His  Prophet  jg  to  pre-empt  the  arguments  with 
the  idolators: 

j 


4Say  (O  Muliammad  sg  to  the  Jews  and  Christians),  " Dispute  you 
with  us  about  Allah}  meaning,  “Do  you  dispute  with  us  regarding 
the  Oneness  of  Allah,  obedience  and  submission  to  Him  and  in 
avoiding  His  prohibitions, 


4wliile  He  is  our  Lord  and  your  Lord?}  meaning,  He  has  full 
control  over  us  and  you,  and  deserves  the  worship  alone 
without  partners. 


4p£  py  u;} 


4And  we  are  to  be  rewarded  for  our  deeds  and  you  for  your  deeds.} 
meaning,  we  disown  you  and  what  you  worship,  just  as  you 
disown  us.  Allah  said  in  another  Ayah, 


■>&  £  ’Iztf  %  &\  %  £  pZ  pj  P  4  O0 


4 .  *' . 


4 And  if  they  belie  you,  say  :  "For  me  are  my  deeds  and  for  you 
are  your  deeds!  You  are  innocent  of  what  /  do,  and  I  am 
innocent  ofivhat  you  do!"}  (10:41),  and, 


415 


Sura}!  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149 )  (Part-1) 


4So  if  they  dispute  with  you  (Muhammad  jg)  say:  "I  have 
submitted  myself  to  Allah  (in  Islam),  and  (so  have)  those  who 
folloiv  me"}  (3:20).  Allah  said  about  Ibrahim, 


Jit  *  *  '''*  •  /  / 

4  Js 


C 


4His  people  disputed  with  him.  He  said:  "Do  you  dispute  with 
me  concerning  Allah"}  (6:80),  and, 

j  | ep-  ji'  j)  'fo  fo} 

iHave  you  not  looked  at  him  ivho  disputed  with  Ibrahim  about 
his  Lord  (Allah)?}  (2:258).  He  said  in  this  honorable  Ayah, 

9  &  pi  T3j» 

4 And  we  are  to  be  rewarded  for  our  deeds  and  you  for  your  deeds. 
And  we  are  sincere  to  Him.}  meaning,  “We  disown  you  just  as 
you  disown  us,” 


4And  we  are  sincere  to  Him},  in  worship  and  submission. 

Allah  then  criticized  them  in  the  claim  that  Ibrahim,  the 
Prophets  who  came  after  him  and  the  Asbat  were  following 
their  religion,  whether  Judaism  or  Christianity.  Allah  said, 

4&  f  p  p  fo 


4Say ,  "Do  you  know  better  or  does  Allah?”}  meaning,  Allah  has 
the  best  knowledge  and  He  stated  that  they  were  neither  Jews, 
nor  Christians.  Similarly,  Allah  said  in  the  Ayah, 


i 


ilbrdhun  zvas  neither  a  Jezv  nor  a  Christian,  but  he  zvas  a  true 
Muslim  Hanifa  (to  worship  none  but  Allah  alone)  and  he  zvas 
not  of  Al-Mushriktn}  (3:67)  and  the  following  Ayat.  Allah 
also  said, 


ifo  tin  /iie  p  o 

iAnd  who  is  more  unjust  than  he  who  conceals  the  testimony  he  has 
from  Allah?}  (2:140).  Al-Hasan  Al-Basri  said,  “They  used  to 
recite  the  Book  of  Allah  He  sent  to  them  that  stated  that  the 
true  religion  is  Islam  and  that  Muhammad  is  the  Messenger 


416 


Tafsir  Jbn  Kathir 

of  Allah.  Their  Book  also  stated  that  Ibrahim,  Ismail,  Ishaq, 
Ya'qub  and  the  tribes  were  neither  Jews,  nor  Christians.  They 
testified  to  these  facts,  yet  hid  them  from  the  people.  Allah’s 
statement, 

\£} 

4And  Allah  is  not  unaware  of  what  you  do},  is  a  threat  and  a 
warning  that  His  knowledge  encompasses  eveiy  one’s  deeds, 
and  He  shall  award  each  accordingly.  Allah  then  said, 

iThat  was  a  nation  who  has  passed  away.}  meaning,  existed  before 
you, 

} They  shall  receive  the  reward  of  what  they  earned,  and  you  of  what 
you  earn.}  meaning,  they  bear  their  deeds  while  you  bear  yours, 

Uf-  jjllS  *ij} 

iAnd  you  will  not  be  asked  of  what  they  used  to  do}  meaning,  the 
fact  that  you  are  their  relatives  will  not  suffice,  unless  you 
imitate  their  good  deeds.  Further,  do  not  be  deceived  by  the 
fact  that  you  are  their  descendants,  unless  you  imitate  them  in 
obeying  Allah’s  orders  and  following  His  Messengers  who  were 
sent  as  wamers  and  bearers  of  good  news.  Indeed,  whoever 
disbelieves  in  even  one  Prophet,  will  have  disbelieved  in  all  the 
Messengers,  especially  if  one  disbelieves  in  the  master  and 
Final  Messenger  from  Allah,  the  Lord  of  the  worlds,  to  all 
mankind  and  the  Jinns.  May  Allah’s  peace  and  blessings  be  on 
Muhammad  sg  and  the  rest  of  Allah’s  Prophets. 


^  :?>•  _j.  ,  '•■  .if,  .- 

1'  'wA.'t'  '  f  i*-'£>  ?•'()''  -  !•'{?<'  .1  *  *  '*''  '  ***  ',1'> 

>>?d!  A-^  'j  o^-J  wo*  j»  Ufo-  *135  ijj{  3  ^ 

‘^L=Cj  uiSj 0  ^  ^  rfs£ 

l*» *”&r*  •< 

,>  U^J  & 

6^S  ^0)1 

S^J4i(  ijii  1^'  bili  Uj  '4_*i 

e£  ^  ^  ^ 

^  ^  **  «  &  ^ 
$  Sj&gifS.  ^jij  ^  ^  ^ 

***** 

hypocrites,  and 

_  T _ i  .1 


3jij  <J$%\  '&  <Ci  ftz&i 


£$*  i>  • 


tuouto^, 

^ hypocrites,  and 

=il  Jews)  among  the 
people  will  say : 

" What  has  turned  them  (Muslims)  from  their  Qiblah  [prayer 
direction  (towards  Jerusalem)]  to  which  they  used  to  face  in 
prayer ."  Say  (O  Muhammad  m) :  "To  Allah  belong  both,  east 
and  the  west.  He  guides  whom  He  wills  to  the  straight  way.”} 


4143.  Thus  We  have  made  you  [true  Muslims  -  real  believers 
of  Islamic  Monotheism,  true  followers  of  Prophet  Muhammad 
M  and  his  Sunnah  (legal  ways)],  a  Wasat  (just  and  the  best) 
nation,  that  you  be  witnesses  over  mankind  and  the  Messenger 
(Muhammad  j§)  be  a  witness  over  you.  And  We  made  the 
Qiblah  which  you  used  to  face,  only  to  test  those  who  followed 
the  Messenger  (Muhammad  from  those  who  would  turn  on 
their  heels  (i.e.,  disobey  the  Messenger).  Indeed  it  was  great 
(heavy,  difficult)  except  for  those  whom  Allah  guided.  And 


418 


Tgjsir  Ibn  Kathir 

Allah  would  never  make  your  faith  (prayers)  to  be  lost  (i.e., 
your  prayers  offered  towards  Jerusalem).  Truly ,  Allah  is  full  of 
kindness,  the  Most  Merciful  towards  mankind.} 


Changing  the  Qiblah  —  Direction  of  the  Prayer 

Imam  AI-Bukhari  reported  that  Al-Bara’  bin  ‘Azib  narrated: 
“Allah’s  Messenger  ^5  offered  his  prayers  facing  Bayt  Al-Maqdis 
(Jerusalem)  for  sixteen  or  seventeen  months,  but  he  wished 
that  he  could  pray  facing  the  Ka'bah  (at  Makkah).  The  first 
prayer  which  he  offered  (facing  the  Ka'bah)  was  the  ‘Asr 
(Afternoon)  prayer  in  the  company  of  some  people.  Then  one  of 
those  who  had  offered  that  prayer  with  him,  went  out  and 
passed  by  some  people  in  a  mosque  who  were  in  the  bowing 
position  (in  Ruku)  during  their  prayers  (facing  Jerusalem).  He 
addressed  them  saying,  ‘By  Allah,  I  bear  witness  that  I  have 
offered  prayer  with  the  Prophet  jjg£  facing  Makkah  {Ka'bah).’ 
Hearing  that,  those  people  immediately  changed  their  direction 
towards  the  House  {Ka'bah)  while  still  as  they  were  (i.e.,  in  the 
same  bowing  position).  Some  Muslims  who  offered  prayer 
towards  the  previous  Qiblah  (Jerusalem)  before  it  was  changed 
towards  the  House  (the  Ka'bah  in  Makkah)  had  died  or  had 
been  martyred,  and  we  did  not  know  what  to  say  about  them 
(regarding  their  prayers  towards  Jerusalem).  Allah  then 
revealed: 

Zjij  41  <L\  pQi  y&,  ®  'iff 


iAnd  Allah  zoould  never  make  your  faith  (prayers)  to  be  lost 
(i.e.,  the  prayers  of  those  Muslims  were  valid)}  (2:143).” 

Al-Bukhari*11  collected  this  narration,  while  Muslim121 
collected  it  using  another  chain  of  narrators.  Muhammad  bin 
Ishaq  reported  that  Al-Bara'  narrated:  Allah's  Messenger 
used  to  offer  prayers  towards  Bayt  Al-Maqdis  (in  Jerusalem), 
but  would  keep  looking  at  the  sky  awaiting  Allah's  command  (to 
change  the  Qiblah ).  Then  Allah  revealed: 


[l>  FathAl-Bari  8:20. 
121  Muslim  1  :375. 


419 


Surah  2.  Ai-Baqarah  (125  -  149}  (Part-2) 

4  Verily,  We  have  seen  the  turning  of  your  (Muhammad’s)  face 
toivards  the  heaven.  Surely,  We  shall  turn  you  to  a  Qiblah 
( prayer  direction)  that  shall  please  you,  so  turn  your  face  in  the 
direction  of  Al-Masjid  Al-Hardtn  (at  Makkah).}  (2:144) 

A  man  from  among  the  Muslims  then  said,  “We  wish  we 
could  know  about  those  among  us  who  died  before  the  Qiblah 
was  changed  (i.e.,  towards  Makkah)  and  also  about  our  own 
prayers,  that  we  had  performed  towards  Bayt  Al-Maqdis.” 
Allah  then  revealed: 

Vji} 

iAnd  Allah  would  never  make  your  faith  (prayers)  to  be  lost  .} 
(2:143) 

The  fools  among  the  people,  meaning  the  People  of  the 
Scripture  (Jews  and  Christians),  said,  “What  made  them 
change  the  former  Qiblah  that  they  used  to  face?”  Allah  then 
revealed: 


4-#  «  ^  ^  ¥ 


iThe  fools  (idolators,  hypocrites,  and  Jeivs)  among  the  people 
will  say... $ 

until  the  end  of  the  Ayah.*1* 

‘Ali  bin  Abu  Talhah  related  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said:  When 
Allah’s  Messenger  jg  migrated  to  Al-Madlnah,  Allah 
commanded  him  to  face  Bayt  Al-Maqdis  (Jerusalem).  The  Jews 
were  delighted  then.  Allah’s  Messenger  jfe  faced  Jerusalem  for 
over  ten  months.  However,  he  liked  (to  offer  prayer  in  the 
direction  of)  Prophet  Ibrahim’s  Qiblah  (the  Ka’bah  in  Makkah) 
and  used  to  supplicate  to  Allah  and  kept  looking  up  to  the  sky 
(awaiting  Allah’s  command  in  this  regard).  Allah  then  revealed: 

j )y} 


4  turn  your  faces  (in  prayer)  in  that  direction.} 

meaning,  its  direction.  The  Jews  did  not  like  this  change  and 
said,  “What  made  them  change  the  Qiblah  that  they  used  to 
face  (meaning  Jerusalem)?”  Allah  revealed: 


m  Al-Qurtubi  3:133. 


420 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kgthir 


iSay  (O  Muhammad  jg) :  "To  Allah  belong  both,  east  and  the 
west.  He  guides  whom  He  wills  to  the  straight  way .'V1' 


There  are  several  other  Ahadith  on  this  subject.  In  summary, 
Allah’s  Messenger  jg  was  commanded  to  face  Bayt  Al-Maqdis 
(during  the  prayer)  and  he  used  to  offer  prayer  towards  it  in 
Makkah  between  the  two  comers  (of  Ka'bah),  so  that  the 
Ka'bah  would  be  between  him  and  Bayt  Al-Maqdis8.  When  the 
Prophet  jg  migrated  to  Al-Madinah,  this  practice  was  no  longer 
possible;  then  Allah  commanded  him  to  offer  prayer  towards 
Bayt  Al-Maqdis,  as  Ibn  Abbas  and  the  majority  of  the  scholars 
have  stated. 

Al-Bukhari  reported  in  his  Sahih  that  the  news  (of  the 
change  of  Qiblah)  was  conveyed  to  some  of  the  Ansar  while 
they  were  performing  the  'Asr  (Afternoon)  prayer  towards  Bayt 
Al-Maqdis,  upon  hearing  that,  they  immediately  changed  their 
direction  and  faced  the  Ka'bah ,|21 

It  is  reported  in  the  Sahihayn  (Al-Bukhari  &  Muslim)  that 
Ibn  ‘Umar  narrated:  While  the  people  were  in  Quba’  (Mosque) 
performing  the  Fajr  (Dawn)  prayer,  a  man  came  and  said,  “A 
(part  of  the)  Qur’an  was  revealed  tonight  to  Allah's  Messenger 
sg  and  he  was  commanded  to  face  the  Ka'bah.  Therefore,  face 
the  Ka'bah.  They  were  facing  Ash-Sham,  so  they  turned 
towards  the  Ka'bah .|3* 

These  Hadiths  prove  that  the  Nasikh  (a  Text  that  abrogates  a 
previous  Text)  only  applies  after  one  acquires  knowledge  of  it, 
even  if  the  Nasikh  had  already  been  revealed  and  announced. 
This  is  why  the  Companions  mentioned  above  were  not 
commanded  to  repeat  the  previous  ‘Asr,  Maghrib  and  ‘ Isha ’ 
prayers  (although  they  had  prayed  them  towards  Jerusalem 
after  Allah  had  changed  the  Qiblah).  Allah  knows  best. 

When  the  change  of  Qiblah  (to  Ka'bah  in  Makkah)  occurred, 
those  inflicted  with  hypocrisy  and  mistrust,  and  the 
disbelieving  Jews,  both  were  led  astray  from  the  right  guidance 
and  fell  into  confusion.  They  said: 


111  At-Tabari  3:138. 

^  Al-Bukhari  no.  399.  These  people  were  from  the  tribe  of  Banu 
Salamah. 

131  Fath  Al-Bdri  8 :24 ,  and  Muslim  1 :375 . 


421 


Surah  L  Al-Baaarah  ( 125  -  149)  (Part-2) 

4What  has  turned  them  (Muslims)  from  their  Qiblah  to  which 
they  used  to  face  in  prayer.  ^ 

They  asked,  “What  is  the  matter  with  these  people  (Muslims) 
who  one  time  face  this  direction  (Jerusalem),  and  then  face 
that  direction  (Makkah)?”  Allah  answered  their  questions  when 
He  stated: 


J^ 


iSay  (O  Multantmad  jg);  "To  Allah  belong  both,  east  and  the 
west.} 


meaning,  the  command,  the  decision  and  the  authority  are  for 
Allah  Alone.  Hence: 


4... so  wherever  you  turn  (yourselves  or  your  faces)  there  is  the 
Face  of  Allah  (and  He  is  High  above,  over  His  Throne).} 
(2:115), 

and: 


4*^  Jr*  [A?  u’  ji* 


4  It  is  not  Al-Birr  (piety,  righteousness)  that  you  turn  your 
faces  towards  east  and  (or)  west  (in  prayers);  but  Al-Birr  is  the 
one  who  believes  in  Allah.}  (2:177) 

This  statement  means,  the  best  act  is  to  adhere  to  Allah’s 
commands.  Hence,  wherever  He  commands  us  to  face,  we 
should  face.  Also,  since  obedience  requires  implementing 
Allah’s  commands,  if  He  commands  us  every  day  to  face 
different  places,  we  are  His  servants  and  under  His  disposed, 
and  we  face  whatever  He  orders  us  to  face.  Certainly,  Allah’s 
care  and  kindness  towards  His  servant  and  Messenger, 
Muhammad  sg,  and  certainly,  his  Ummah  (Muslim  nation)  is 
profoundly  great.  Allah  has  guided  them  to  the  Qiblah  of 
(Prophet)  Ibrahim  -  Allah’s  Khalil  (intimate  friend).  He  has 
commanded  them  to  face  the  Ka‘bah,  the  most  honorable 
house  (of  worship)  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  which  was  built  by 
Ibrahim  Al-KhaM  in  the  Name  of  Allah,  the  One  without  a 
partner.  This  is  why  Allah  said  afterwards: 


422 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


4Say  (O  Muhammad  jg) :  "To  Allah  belong  both,  east  and  the 
west.  He  guides  whom  He  wills  to  the  straight  way.”} 

Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  ‘A’ishah  (the  Prophet’s  wife)  said 
that  Allah’s  Messenger  jfe  said  about  the  People  of  the 
Scripture  (Jews  and  Christians): 


tfJ  <3(1  Uli*  jjjJl  U US 

lil^i  <3)1  Ulia  ^1  illill  IjLij 


'jr? 


I 


*They  do  not  envy  us  for  a  matter  more  than  they  envy  us  for 
Jumu'ah  (Friday)  to  which  Allah  has  guided  us  and  from  which 
they  were  led  astray;  for  the  (true)  Qiblah  to  which  Allah  has 
directed  us  and  from  which  they  were  led  astray;  and  for  our 
saying  'Amin'  behind  the  Imam  ( leader  of  the  prayer).^ 


The  Virtues  of  Muhammad's  Nation 

Allah  said: 


\S  ‘^hc.  ofsj}  ujll)'  Jc  iTlfi  [y_fo=ci  Uo—J  iil  iZl'jSj} 


iThus  We  have  made  you  [true  Muslims],  a  Wasat  (just)  (and 
the  best)  nation,  that  you  be  wihiesses  over  mankind  and  the 
Messenger  (Muhammad  jg)  be  a  witness  over  you.} 

Allah  stated  that  He  has  changed  our  Qiblah  to  the  Qiblah  of 
Ibrahim  and  chose  it  for  us  so  that  He  makes  us  the  best 
nation  ever.  Hence,  we  will  be  the  witnesses  over  the  nations 
on  the  Day  of  Resurrection,  for  all  of  them  will  then  agree 
concerning  our  virtue.  The  word  Wasat  in  the  Ayah  means  the 
best  and  the  most  honored.  Therefore,  saying  that  (the 
Prophet’s  tribe)  Quraysh  is  in  the  Wasat  regarding  Arab  tribes 
and  their  areas,  means  the  best.  Similarly,  saying  that  Allah’s 
Messenger  was  in  the  Wasat  of  his  people,  means  he  was 
from  the  best  subtribe.  Also,  ‘Asr,  the  prayer  that  is  described 
as  'Wusta'  (a  variation  of  the  word  Wasat),  means  the  best 
prayer,  as  the  authentic  collections  of  Ahadith  reported.  Since 
Allah  made  this  Ummah  (Muslim  nation)  the  Wasat,  He  has 
endowed  her  with  the  most  complete  legislation,  the  best 


m 


Ahmad  6:134. 


423 


SOrah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149)  (Part-2) 


Manhaj  (way,  method,  etc.,)  and  the  clearest  Madhhab 
(methodology,  mannerism,  etc).  Allah  said: 


it  0  4  SZ  Cj  » 

4^'  £  ;iv  $3?  <L£  Spj\  Ipi  &  ^  jj  «  ^pT 


4He  has  chosen  you  (to  convey  His  Message  of  Islamic 
Monotheism  to  mankind),  and  has  not  laid  upon  you  in  religion 
any  hardship:  it  is  the  religion  of  your  father  Ibrahim .  It  is  He 
(Allah)  Who  has  named  you  Muslims  both  before  and  in  this 
(the  Qur'an),  that  the  Messenger  (Muhammad  0)  may  be  a 
ivitness  over  you  and  you  be  witnesses  over  mankind !)  (22:78) 


Moreover,  Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  Abu  Said  narrated: 
Allah’s  Messenger  said: 


(JtL#  a Aji  :J yii  (JJ&  1  aJ  JlJ&J  c AaLaII  7-^ y 

if  '■  £jd  j*  Jilt  U j  p  ja  liui  U  :  ofyCi 

4Ua-»j  iii  ‘p&jar  :  aJ Ji) ji  (J ti  iAi»ij  JUm  :  J jZi  ?«2i)  > j> 

a]  O t  JjbJl  Ja**- j  I  <Jli 


«Nw/i  ioi//  be  called  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection  and  will  be 
asked,  'Have  you  conveyed  (the  Message)?'  He  ivill  say,  'Yes.' 
His  people  will  be  summoned  and  asked,  'Has  Niih  conveyed 
(the  Message)  to  you?'  They  will  say,  'No  wamer  came  to  us 
and  no  one  (Prophet)  ivas  sent  to  us.'  Nidi  ivill  be  asked,  'Who 
testifies  for  you?'  He  ivill  say,  'Muhammad  and  his  Ummah.' » 


This  is  why  Allah  said: 


iThus  We  have  made  you  a  Wosaf  nation.  4 
The  Prophet  jg  said; 

“ The  Wasat  means  the  'Adi  (just).  You  will  be  summoned  to 
testify  that  Nuh  has  conveyed  (his  Message),  and  l  will  attest  to 
your  testimony 

It  was  also  recorded  by  Al-Bukhari,  At-Tirmidhi,  An-Nasa’i 
and  Ibn  Majah.*2' 

111  Ahmad  3:32. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  8  :21 ,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8 :297,  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra 
6 :292 ,  and  Ibn  Majah  2 :1432 . 


424 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Imam  Ahmad  also  reported  that  Abu  Said  Khudri  narrated: 
Allah’s  Messenger  sfe  said: 


JUj  I.  ilJi 

Ifi  :  JUj  «.  :  J cJJu  Ji  :aJ  JUli  N  :  ofiyij  ?IJl&  j^SiU 

^jL  ji  Jtali  l  of_j  aL»«.<  ^tjui  i<olj  JU^t«  :  VtliJ  .1  j.t; 

jl  U 5^  ll*J  Uil>-  :  yCi  U _)  :JUL&  ?<u^i 

Vup  :  Jl*  isA  j^Svi.C  3*  “^3*  *-lJjii  i  Ijifc  Ji 

<ts^  ££  Aa>'  S&j  ^dit  #  uv  u£j  &  f&fc;  4'SS> 


«77ie  Prophet  would  come  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection  with  two 
or  more  people  (Ids  only  following !),  and  his  people  would  also 
be  summoned  and  asked,  'Has  he  (their  Prophet)  conveyed  (the 
Message)  to  you?'  They  would  say,  'No.'  He  would  be  asked, 
'Have  you  conveyed  (the  Message)  to  your  people?'  He  would 
say,  'Yes.'  He  would  be  asked,  "Who  testifies  for  you?'  He 
would  say,  'Muhammad  and  his  Ummah Muhammad  and  his 
Ummah  would  then  be  summoned  and  asked,  'Has  he  conveyed 
(the  Message)  to  his  people?'  They  would  say,  'Yes.'  They 
would  be  asked,  Who  told  you  that?'  They  would  say,  'Our 
Prophet  (Muhammad)  came  to  us  and  told  us  that  the 
Messengers  have  conveyed  (their  Messages) 

Hence  Allah’s  statement: 


{Thus  We  have  made  you  a  Wasat  nation.} 

He  said,  “(meaning)  the  'Adi,  ’  (he  then  continued  reciting  the 
Ayah): 


fit  *spj\  o&3  j.ilii  £  iE#  u£j  ISl  p&Z 


iThus  We  have  made  you,  a  just  (and  the  best)  nation,  that 
you  be  witnesses  over  mankind  and  the  Messenger  (Muhammad 
g£)  be  a  witness  over  i/ow.^”1’1 

Furthermore,  Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  Abul-Aswad 
narrated:  I  came  to  Al-Madinah  and  found  that  an  epidemic 
had  broken  out  that  caused  many  fatalities.  I  sat  next  to 

m 


Ahmad  3 :58. 


425 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149 )  (Part-2) 


‘Umar  bin  Al-Khattab  once  when  a  funeral  procession  started 
and  the  people  praised  the  dead  person.  Umar  said,  “ Wajabat 
(it  will  be  recorded  as  such),  Wajabat i”  Then  another  funeral 
was  brought  forth  and  the  people  criticized  the  dead  person. 
Again,  Umar  said,  uWajabat.yt  Abul-Aswad  asked,  “What  is 
Wajabat ,  O  Leader  of  the  faithful?*’  He  said,  “I  said  just  like 
Allah’s  Messenger  jg  had  said: 


:  jiii  :  jii  ilia  :  Jii  »&ji  Jill  iUs!  fL  iZji  Jj  ui!> 

jc.  Jj Uj  p  JLi  Jii  :  jlL:0  i-iii  :  Jii 


•Any  Muslim  for  whom  four  testify  that  he  was  righteous,  then 
Allah  will  enter  him  into  Paradise.'  We  said,  'What  about 
three?’  He  said,  ' And  three.'  We  said,  'And  two?'  He  said, 
'And  two.'  We  did  not  ask  him  about  (the  testimony)  of  one 
(believing)  person 

This  was  also  recorded  by  Al-Bukhari,  At-Tirmidhi,  and  An- 
Nasa’i^2' 


The  Wisdom  behind  changing  the  Qiblah 

Allah  then  said: 


y:  &  (fci 'fi  tiz.  Uj> 

if 


iAnd  We  made  the  Qiblah  (prayer  direction  towards  Jerusalettt) 
which  you  used  to  face,  only  to  test  those  who  followed  the 
Messenger  (Muhammad  from  those  who  would  turn  on 
their  heels  (i.e.,  disobey  the  Messenger).  Indeed  it  was  great 
(heavy,  difficult)  except  for  those  whom  Allah  guided.} 

Allah  states  thus:  We  have  legislated  for  you,  O 
Muhammad,  facing  Bayt  Al-Maqdis  at  first  and  then  changed 
it  to  the  Ka'bah  so  as  to  find  who  will  follow  and  obey  you  and 
thus  face  whatever  you  face. 

if  J.liJ 


i . .  .from  those  who  would  turn  on  their  heels.} 


I1'  Ahmad  1 :21 . 

Fath  Al-Bari  3 :27 1 ,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  4 : 166 ,  and  An-Nasa’i  4:51. 


426 


Ta  fsir  Ibn  Kathir 
meaning,  reverts  from  his  religion.  [Allah  then  said:] 

&  &} 


ilndeed  it  was  great  (heavy,  difficult)} 

The  Ayah  indicates  that  changing  the  Qiblah  from  Bayt  Al- 
Maqdis  to  the  Ka'bah  is  heavy  on  the  heart,  except  for 
whomever  Allah  has  rightly  guided  their  hearts,  who  believe  in 
the  truth  of  the  Messenger  with  certainty  and  that  whatever 
he  was  sent  with  is  the  truth  without  doubt.  It  is  they  who 
believe  that  Allah  does  what  He  wills,  decides  what  He  wills, 
commands  His  servants  with  what  He  wills,  abrogates  any  of 
His  commands  that  He  wills,  and  that  He  has  the  perfect 
wisdom  and  the  unequivocal  proof  in  all  this.  (The  attitude  of 
the  believers  in  this  respect  is)  unlike  those  who  have  a  disease 
in  their  hearts,  to  whom  whenever  a  matter  occurs,  it  causes 
doubts,  just  as  this  same  matter  adds  faith  and  certainty  to  the 
believers.  Similarly,  Allah  said: 


Y 


4 


4 


iAnd  whenever  there  comes  down  a  Surah  (chapter  from  the 
Qur'an),  some  of  them  ( hypocrites )  say:  “ Which  of  you  has  had 
his  faith  increased  by  it?”  As  for  those  who  believe,  it  has 
increased  their  faith,  and  they  rejoice.  But  as  for  those  in  whose 
hearts  is  a  disease  (of  doubt,  disbelief  and  hypocrisy),  it  will  add 
doubt  and  disbelief  to  their  doubt  and  disbelief;  and  they  die 
while  they  are  disbelievers .}  (9:124,  125) 

and: 


'ji  io&f  4*;  vj  legi  ■&,  'fr  6  oj 


iAnd  We  send  down  of  the  Qur’an  that  which  is  a  healing  and 
a  mercy  to  those  xoho  believe,  and  it  increases  the  wrongdoers  in 
nothing  but  loss.}  (17:82) 

Certainly,  those  who  remained  faithful  to  the  Messenger  jg, 
obeyed  him  and  faced  whatever  Allah  commanded  them, 
without  doubt  or  hesitation,  were  the  leaders  of  the 
Companions.  Some  scholars  stated  that  the  Early  Migrants 


427 


Surah  2.  (125  -  149 )  (Part-2) 

(who  migrated  with  the  Prophet  jg  from  Makkah  to  Al-Madlnah) 
and  Ansar  (the  residents  of  Al-Madinah  who  gave  aid  and 
refuge  to  both  the  Prophet  jg  and  the  Migrants)  were  those  who 
offered  prayers  towards  the  two  Qiblah  (Bayt  Al-Maqdis  and 
then  the  Ka'bah ). 

Al-Bukhari  reported  in  the  explanation  of  the  Ayah  (2:143) 
that  Ibn  Umar  narrated:  While  the  people  were  performing  the 
Fajr  (Dawn)  prayer  in  the  Quba’  Mosque,  a  man  came  and 
said,  “Qur’an  was  revealed  to  the  Prophet  ag  and  he  was 
ordered  to  face  the  Ka'bah.  Therefore,  face  the  Ka'bah.”  They 
then  faced  the  Ka'bah .***  Muslim  also  recorded  it.*2' 

At-Tirmidhi  added  that  they  were  performing  Ruku'  (bowing 
down  in  prayer),  and  then  changed  the  direction  (of  the 
Qiblah )  to  the  Ka'bah  while  still  bowing  down.*3*  Muslim 
reported  this  last  narration  from  Anas.*4*  These  Hadiths  all 
indicate  the  perfect  obedience  the  Companions  had  for  Allah 
and  His  Messenger  jg  and  their  compliance  with  Allah’s 
commandments,  may  Allah  be  pleased  with  them  all. 

Allah  said: 

i(&li[  ^-a-I  Sil 

iAnd  Allah  zvould  never  make  your  faith  (prayers)  to  be  lost.} 

meaning,  the  reward  of  your  prayers  towards  Bayt  Al-Maqdis 
before  would  not  be  lost  with  Allah.  It  is  reported  in  SahOi  that 
Abu  Ishaq  As-Sabi“y  related  that  Bara’  narrated:  “The  people 
asked  about  the  matter  of  those  who  offered  prayers  towards 
Bayt  Al-Maqdis  and  died  (before  the  Qiblah  was  changed  to 
Ka'bah).  Allah  revealed: 

ipQi  yb  & 

iAnd  Allah  would  never  make  your  faith  (prayers)  to  be  lost.}” 

It  was  also  recorded  by  At-Tirmidhi  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  and  At- 
Tirmidhi  graded  it  Sahih .*5* 

Ibn  Ishaq  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  narrated: 

[1*  Fath  Al-Bari  8 :22 . 

*2'  Muslim  1 :375 . 

*3*  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8 :300 . 

*4*  Muslim  1  :375. 

*5'  Fath  Al-Bari  8  :20 ,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8  :300 . 


42  8 


Tafstr  Ibtt  KaMr 


iAnd  Allah  would  never  make  your  faith  to  be  lost.} 

entails:  Your  (prayer  towards)  the  first  Qiblah  and  your 
believing  your  Prophet  and  obeying  him  by  facing  the  second 
Qiblah ;  He  will  grant  you  the  rewards  for  all  these  acts. 
Indeed, 

u»j<$ 


iTruly,  Allah  is  full  of  kindness,  the  Most  Merciful  towards 
mankind. 


Furthermore,  it  is  reported  in  the  Sahih  that  Allah’s 
Messenger  saw  a  woman  among  the  captives  who  was 
separated  from  her  child.  Whenever  she  found  a  boy  (infant) 
among  the  captives,  she  would  hold  him  close  to  her  chest,  as 
she  was  looking  for  her  boy.  When  she  found  her  child,  she 
embraced  him  and  gave  him  her  breast  to  nurse.  Allah’s 
Messenger  jg  said: 


U  Y  :  l _jJ15  'j  ji  jjz  jllll  ^  lajjj  1 

•Lajjjj  ;Jla  oCau  <i)lyD  :  Jli  .  ail  I  j 


«Do  you  think  that  this  woman  would  willingly  throw  her  son 
in  tlte  fire ?»  They  said,  “No,  O  Messenger  of  Allah!”  He 
said,  “By  Allah!  Allah  is  more  merciful  with  His  servants  than 
this  woman  with  her  som.»|2* 


jy  U— V  ii-J  "jylt  ,U^lf  4 
Oj  4»Jl  Ojilad  i_y_)l  ojjji  j£j kjij  IjSy  'C. 


4144.  Verily,  We  have  seen  the  turning  of  your  (Muhammad’s) 
face  towards  the  heaven.  Surely,  We  shall  turn  you  to  a  Qiblah 
(prayer  direction)  that  shall  please  you,  so  turn  your  face  in  the 
direction  of  Al-Masjid  Al-Hardm  (at  Makkah) .  And  wheresoever 
you  people  are,  turn  your  faces  (in  prayer)  in  that  direction. 
Certainly,  the  people  who  were  given  the  Scripture  (i.e.,  Jews 


1,1  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :99. 
,2)  Muslim  4:2109. 


429 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  249)  (Part-2) 

and  Christians)  know  well  that,  that  (your  turning  towards  the 
direction  of  the  Ka'bah  at  Makkah  in  prayers)  is  the  truth  from 
their  Lord.  And  Allah  is  not  unaware  of  what  they  do}. 


The  First  Abrogation  in  the  Qur’an  was  about  the  Qiblah 

*Ali  bin  Abu  Talhah  related  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  narrated:  The 
first  abrogated  part  in  the  Qur’an  was  about  the  Qiblah.  When 
Allah’s  Messenger  sjg  migrated  to  Al-Madlnah,  the  majority  of 
its  people  were  Jews,  and  Allah  commanded  him  to  face  Bayt 
Al-Maqdis.  The  Jews  were  delighted  then.  Allah’s  Messenger  jg 
faced  it  for  ten  and  some  months,  but  he  liked  to  face  the 
Qiblah  of  Ibrahim  ( Ka'bah  in  Makkah).  He  used  to  supplicate  to 
Allah  and  look  up  to  the  sky  (awaiting  Allah’s  command).  Allah 
then  revealed: 

if  j  csj  %} 

4  Verily ,  We  have  seen  the  turning  of  your  (Muhammad's)  face 
towards  the  heaven },  until, 


itum  your  faces  (in  prayer)  in  that  direction.  } 
The  Jews  did  not  like  this  ruling  and  said: 

ji  ££  'jf  Jj  ’rffj  o* 


4' 'What  has  turned  them  (Muslims)  from  their  Qiblah  (prayer 
direction)  to  which  they  used  to  face  in  prayer."  Say  (O 
Multammad),  "To  Allah  belong  both,  east  and  the  west."} 
(2: 1*42)' 11 
Allah  said: 

jJ-j  jiii  ijiy  ^ 

4 . .  .so  wherever  you  turn  (yourselves  or  your  faces)  there  is  the 

Face  of  Allah}  (2: 115), 

and: 


4And  We  made  the  Qiblah  (prayer  direction  towards  Jerusalem) 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :103. 


430 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 

which  you  used  to  face,  only  to  test  those  who  follmoed  the 
Messenger  (Muhammad  sg)  from  those  who  would  turn  on 
their  heels  (i.e.,  disobey  the  Messenger) (2:143) 


Is  the  Qiblah  the  Ka'bah  itself  or  its  General  Direction? 

Al-Hakim  related  that  ‘Ali  bin  Abu  Talib  said: 

4 .  •  .so  turn  your  face  in  the  direction  of  Al-Masjid  Al-Hardm 
(at  Makkah ).}  means  its  direction.”^ 

Al-Hakim  then  commented  that  the  chain  of  this  narration  is 
authentic  and  that  they  (i.e.,  Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim)  did  not 
include  it  in  their  collections. 

This  ruling  concerning  the  Qiblah  is  also  the  opinion  of  Abu 
Al-‘Aliyah,  Mujahid,  ‘Ikrimah,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Qatadah,  Ar- 
Rabl‘  bin  Anas  and  others.^ 

Allah’s  Statement: 

4tr^“ 

4And  wheresoever  you  people  are,  turn  your  faces  (in  prayer) 
in  that  direction  ^ 

is  a  command  from  Allah  to  face  the  Ka'bcih  from  wherever 
one  is  on  the  earth:  the  east,  west,  north  or  south.  The 
exception  is  of  the  voluntary  prayer  (Nafl)  while  one  is 
traveling,  for  one  is  allowed  to  offer  it  in  any  direction  his  body 
is  facing,  while  his  heart  is  intending  the  Ka'bah.  Also,  when 
the  battle  is  raging,  one  is  allowed  to  offer  prayer,  however  he 
is  able.  Also,  included  are  those  who  are  not  sure  of  the 
direction  and  offer  prayer  in  the  wrong  direction,  thinking  that 
it  is  the  direction  of  the  Qiblah,  because  Allah  does  not  burden 
a  soul  beyond  what  it  can  bear. 


The  Jews  had  Knowledge  that  the  (Muslim)  Qiblah 
would  later  be  changed 

Allah  stated  that: 


^  Al-Mustadrak  2 :269 . 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 : 107- 109. 


431 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (125  -  149}  ( Parf-2 ) 

iCertainly,  the  people  who  were  given  the  Scripture  (i.e.,  Jews 
and  the  Christians)  know  well  that,  that  (your  turning  towards 
the  direction  of  the  Ka'bah  at  Makkah  in  prayers)  is  the  truth 
from  their  Lord.  } 

This  Ayah  means:  The  Jews,  who  did  not  like  that  you 
change  your  Qiblah  from  Bayt  Al-Maqdis,  already  knew  that 
Allah  will  command  you  (O  Muhammad)  to  face  the  Ka'bah. 
The  Jews  read  in  their  Books  their  Prophets’  description  of 
Allah’s  Messenger  jg  and  his  Ummah,  and  that  Allah  has 
endowed  and  honored  him  with  the  complete  and  honorable 
legislation.  Yet,  the  People  of  the  Book  deny  these  facts  because 
of  their  envy,  disbelief  and  rebellion.  This  is  why  Allah 
threatened  them  when  He  said: 


JU  'Cj.  Jii 

iAnd  Allah  is  not  unaware  of  what  they  do.$ 

3A  L'j  iJJ  u  &  jL  yt 

^  jyr  ^  oJ;  iU 

lit 


4145.  And  even  if  you  were  to  bring  to  the  People  of  the 
Scripture  (Jews  and  Christians)  all  the  Ayat  (proofs,  evidences, 
verses,  lessons,  signs,  revelations,  etc.),  they  would  not  follow 
your  Qiblah  (prayer  direction),  nor  are  you  going  to  follow  their 
Qiblah.  And  they  will  not  folloio  each  other's  Qiblah.  Verily,  if 
you  folloio  their  desires  after  that  which  you  luive  received  of 
knoivledge  (from  Allah),  then  indeed  you  will  be  one  of  the 
wrongdoers  .4 


The  Stubbornness  and  Disbelief  of  the  Jews 

Allah  describes  the  Jews’  disbelief,  stubbornness  and 
defiance  of  what  they  know  of  the  truth  of  Allah’s  Messenger 
5g,  that  if  the  Prophet  jg  brought  forward  every  proof  to  the 
truth  of  what  he  was  sent  with,  they  will  never  obey  him  or 
abandon  following  their  desires.  In  another  instance,  Allah  said: 


432 


Tafsfr  Ibn  Kgthtr 

iTruly,  those,  against 
whom  the  Word  (wrath) 
of  your  Lord  has  been 
justified,  will  not  be¬ 
lieve.  Even  if  every  sign 
should  come  to  them, 
until  they  see  the  pain- 
fid  torment.}  (10:96, 
97) 

This  is  why  Allah 
said  here: 

&} 

ewn  »/  you  were 
to  bring  to  the  People  of 
the  Scripture  (Jews  and 
Christians)  all  tlte  Ayat 
(proofs,  evidences , 
verses,  lessons,  signs, 
revelations,  etc.),  they 
would  not  folloio  your 
Qiblah  (prayer 

direction)}. 

Allah’s  statement: 

g£j.  ^j} 

4...  nor  are  you  going  to  folloio  their  Qiblah  $>, 

indicates  the  vigor  with  which  Allah’s  Messenger  $g 
implements  what  Allah  commanded  him.  Allah’s  statement  also 
indicates  that  as  much  as  the  Jews  adhere  to  their  opinions 
and  desires,  the  Prophet  adheres  by  Allah’s  commands, 
obeying  Him  and  following  what  pleases  Him,  and  that  he 
would  never  adhere  to  their  desires  in  any  case.  Hence,  praying 
towards  Bayt  Al-Maqdis  was  not  because  it  was  the  Qiblah  of 
the  Jews,  but  because  Allah  had  commanded  it.  Allah  then 
warns  those  who  knowingly  defy  the  truth,  because  the  proof 
against  those  who  know  is  stronger  than  against  other  people. 
This  is  why  Allah  said  to  His  Messenger  jg  and  his  Ummah: 


m&,  rr  53  =\1 

p-ft  i  p  *  LtM  I 

r  *>:  \'A\<  ')<TA 


A  j 


^k=iLXJoj  Uiijli  pSolc-  fyli 

0 


Surah  2.  AUBaqarah  (125  -  149 )  (Part-2) 


433 


SJ  &  &&  Uojsy  pisTja 


4  Verily,  if  you  fallow  their  desires  after  that  which  you  have 
received  of  knowledge  (from  Allah),  then  indeed  you  will  be  one 
of  the  wrongdoers. $ 


^  *?¥..  ojA*£Jl  de  ^  Cri  3**^'  vj*\ 


4246.  Those  to  whom  We  gave  the  Scripture  (Jews  and 
Christians)  recognise  him  (Muhammad  or  the  Ka'bah  at 
Makkah)  as  they  recognize  their  sons.  But  verily ,  a  party  of 
them  conceal  the  truth  while  the y  kncnv  it  -  [i.e.,  the  qualities 
of  Muhammad  ^  which  are  written  in  the  Tawrdh  arid  the 
Injtl  }. 

4147.  This  is)  the  truth  from  your  Lord .  So  be  you  not  one  of 
those  toho  doubt} . 


The  Jews  know  that  the  Prophet  sfe  is  True,  but  they 
hide  the  Truth 

Allah  states  that  the  scholars  of  the  People  of  the  Scripture 
know  the  truth  of  what  Allah’s  Messenger  was  sent  with, 
just  as  one  of  them  knows  his  own  child,  which  is  a  parable 
that  the  Arabs  use  to  describe  what  is  very  apparent.  Similarly, 
in  a  Hadithy  Allah’s  Messenger  ^  said  to  a  man  who  had  a 
youngster  with  him: 

4j  1  4)1  J j  u  :  Jli  ^  ^ I Jla  cLLjI® 

«/s  this  your  so//?»  He  said,  “Yes,  O  Messenger  of  Allah!  I 
testify  to  this  fact.”  Allah’s  Messenger  £§  said: 

« Well ,  you  would  not  transgress  against  him  nor  zoould  he 
transgress  against  you .»J1* 

According  to  Al-Qurtubi,  it  was  narrated  that  Umar  said  to 
‘Abdullah  bin  Salam  {an  Israelite  scholar  who  became  a 
Muslim),  “Do  you  recognize  Muhammad  as  you  recognize  your 


^  Ahmad  4  :163. 


434 


Tatsir  Ibn  Kathir 

own  son?”  He  replied,  “Yes,  and  even  more.  The  Honest  One 
descended  from  heaven  on  the  Honest  One  on  the  earth  with 
his  (i.e.,  Muhammad’s)  description  and  I  recognized  him, 
although  I  do  not  know  anything  about  his  mother’s  story.”11* 
Allah  states  next  that  although  they  had  knowledge  and 
certainty  in  the  Prophet  si,  they  still: 


icottceal  the  truth.} 

The  Ayah  indicates  that  they  hide  the  truth  from  the  people, 
about  the  Prophet  sg,  that  they  find  in  their  Books, 


iwhile  they  knmo  it.}  Allah  then  strengthens  the  resolve  of  His 
Prophet  and  the  believers  and  affirms  that  what  the  Prophet 
Si  came  with  is  the  truth  without  doubt,  saying: 


4(This  is)  the  truth  from  your  Lord.  So  be  you  not  one  of  those 
who  doubt.} 


*.  tit  J&t  ck  U  #  b&x  ji 

&  s 


4148.  For  every  nation  there  is  a  direction  to  which  they  face 
(in  their  prayers).  So  hasten  towards  ail  that  is  good. 
Wheresoever  you  may  be,  Allah  will  bring  you  together  (on  the 
Day  of  Resurrection) .  Truly,  Allah  is  able  to  do  all  things.} 


Every  Nation  has  a  Qiblah 

Al-‘Awfi  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said: 

A^y  j*  *4*  j 

4For  every  nation  there  is  a  direction  to  which  they  face  (in 
their  prayers)} 

“This  talks  about  followers  of  the  various  religions.  Hence, 
every  nation  and  tribe  has  its  own  Qiblah  that  they  choose, 


Al-Qurtubi  2  : 163 . 


435 


Surah  2.  AIJiaqargh  (150  -  174}  ( Parti ) 


while  Allah’s  appointed  Qiblah  is  what  the  believers  face.”*1' 
Abul-‘Aliyah  said,  “The  Jew  has  a  direction  to  which  he 
faces  (in  the  prayer).  The  Christian  has  a  direction  to  which  he 
faces.  Allah  has  guided  you,  O  (Muslim)  Ummah ,  to  a  Qiblah 
which  is  the  true  Qiblah. ”*2*  This  statement  was  also  related 
to  Mujahid,  ‘Ata’  Ad-Dahhak,  Ar-Rabl*  bin  Anas,  As-Suddi,  and 
others.*3* 

This  last  Ayah  is  similar  to  what  Allah  said: 


z.  4  A  ^  ft  9  &  &  y;  te; 


4 To  each  among  you,  We  have  prescribed  a  law  and  a  clear 
way.  If  Allah  had  willed,  He  zoould  have  made  you  one  nation, 
but  that  (He)  may  test  you  in  what  He  has  given  you;  so 
compete  in  good  deeds.  The  return  of  you  (all)  is  to  Allah.} 
(5:48) 

In  the  Ayah  (2:148),  Allah  said: 


Aj.i*  Js  <j', 


iWheresoever  you  may  be,  Allah  will  bring  you  together  (on 
the  Day  of  Resurrection) .  Truly,  Allah  is  able  to  do  all  things .} 


meaning:  He  is  able  to  gather  you  from  the  earth  even  if  your 
bodies  and  flesh  disintegrated  and  scattered. 


L»)  e&j  ^*1)  C>}j  -uJ. J'  JaC*  jji  cJLJ 


y*  i»ri 


•)[  Ui  j tj£ 


4249.  And  from  wheresoever  you  start  forth  (for  prayers),  htm 
your  face  in  the  direction  of  Al-Masjid  Al-Hardm  (at  Makkah), 
that  is  indeed  the  truth  from  your  Lord.  And  Allah  is  not 
unaware  of  ivhat  you  do.} 

4250.  And  from  wheresoever  you  start  forth  (for  prayers),  turn 

1,1  At-Tabari  3:193. 

*2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :121 . 

*3*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:121-122. 


436 


Tafsir  Um  Kathfr 

your  face  in  the  direction  of  Al-Masjid  Al-Haram  (at  Makkaft), 
and  wheresoever  you  are f  turn  your  faces  towards  it  (when  you 
pray)  so  that  men  may  have  no  argument  against  you  except 
those  of  them  that  are  wrongdoers,  so  fear  them  not ,  but  fear 
Me!  -  And  so  that  l  may  complete  My  blessings  on  you  and 
that  you  may  be  guided.} 


Why  was  changing  the  Qiblah  mentioned  thrice? 


This  is  a  third  command  from  Allah  to  face  ALMasjid  Al- 
Hardm  (the  Sacred  Mosque)  from  eveiy  part  of  the  world 
(during  prayer).  It  was  said  that  Allah  mentioned  this  ruling 
again  here  because  it  is  connected  to  whatever  is  before  and 
whatever  is  after  it.  Hence,  Allah  first  said: 


^Verily,  We  have  seen  the  turning  of  your  (Muhammad's)  face 
towards  the  heaven .  Surely,  We  shall  turn  you  to  a  Qiblah 
(prayer  direction)  that  shall  please  you }  (2:144),  until: 


tLc-  JmJl;  Uj  ^  'l  \Jj\ 


iCertainly,  the  people  who  were  given  the  Scripture  (i.e.t  Jews 
and  the  Christians)  knozo  well  that,  (hat  (your  turning  towards 
the  direction  of  the  Ka'bah  at  Makkah  in  prayers)  is  the  truth 
from  their  Lord.  And  Allah  is  not  unaware  of  what  they  do.} 
(2:144) 


Allah  mentioned  in  these  Aydt  His  fulfillment  of  the  Prophet's 
wish  and  ordered  him  to  face  the  Qiblah  that  he  liked  and  is 
pleased  with.  In  the  second  command,  Allah  said: 


'iiT  U+Ji  (Jr*  Jptil 


iAnd  from  wheresoever  you  start  forth  (for  prayers),  turn  your 
face  in  the  direction  of  Al-Masid  Al-Hardm  that  is  indeed  the 
truth  from  your  Lord .  And  Allah  is  not  unaware  of  what  you 
do.} 

Therefore,  Allah  states  here  that  changing  the  Qiblah  is  also 
the  truth  from  Him,  thus  upgrading  the  subject  more  than  in 
the  First  Ayah,  in  which  Allah  agreed  to  what  His  Prophet  % 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174}  (Part-2) 


437 


had  wished  for.  Thus  Allah  states  that  this  is  also  the  truth 
from  Him  that  He  likes  and  is  pleased  with.  In  the  third 
command,  Allah  refutes  the  Jewish  assertion  that  the  Prophet 
M  faced  their  Qiblah,  as  they  knew  in  their  Books  that  the 
Prophet  sg  will  later  on  be  commanded  to  face  the  Qiblah  of 
Ibrahim,  the  Ka'bah.  The  Arab  disbelievers  had  no  more 
argument  concerning  the  Prophet’s  Qiblah  after  Allah 
commanded  the  Prophet  to  face  the  Qiblah  of  Ibrahim,  which 
is  more  respected  and  honored,  rather  than  the  Qiblah  of  the 
Jews.  The  Arabs  used  to  honor  the  Ka'bah  and  liked  the  fact 
that  the  Messenger  jg  was  commanded  to  face  it. 

The  Wisdom  behind  abrogating  the  Previous  Qiblah 

Allah  said: 

iUL  y-iiu. 

i...so  that  men  may  have  no  argument  against  you  ^ 

Therefore,  the  People  of  the  Book  knew  from  the  description 
of  the  Muslim  Ummah  that  they  would  be  ordered  to  face  the 
Ka'bah.  If  the  Muslims  did  not  fit  this  description,  the  Jews 
would  have  used  this  fact  against  the  Muslims.  If  the  Muslims 
had  remained  on  the  Qiblah  of  Bayt  Al-Maqdis,  which  was  also 
the  Qiblah  of  the  Jews,  this  fact  could  have  been  used  as  the 
basis  of  argument  by  the  Jews  against  other  people. 

Allah’s  Statement: 

irk  13 

i  ■ .  .except  those  of  them  that  are  wrongdoers, $ 
indicates  the  Mushrikin  (polytheists)  of  Quraysh.  The  reasoning 
of  these  unjust  persons  was  the  unsound  statement:  “This 
man  (Muhammad)  claims  that  he  follows  the  religion  of 
Ibrahim!  Hence,  if  his  facing  Bayt  Al-Maqdis  was  a  part  of  the 
religion  of  Ibrahim,  why  did  he  change  it?”  The  answer  to  this 
question  is  that  Allah  has  chosen  His  Prophet  to  face  Bayt 
Al-Maqdis  first  for  certain  wisdom,  and  he  obeyed  Allah 
regarding  this  command.  Then,  Allah  changed  the  Qiblah  to  the 
Qiblah  of  Ibrahim,  which  is  the  Ka'bah,  and  he  also  obeyed 
Allah  in  this  command.  He,  obeys  Allah  in  all  cases  and  never 
engages  in  the  defiance  of  Allah  even  for  an  instant,  and  his 
Ummah  imitates  him  in  this. 


438 


Tafsir  Ibti  Kqthir 


Allah  said: 

ij£X, 

4...  so  fear  them  not,  but  fear  Me!} 

meaning:  ‘Do  not  fear  the  doubts  that  the  unjust,  stubborn 
persons  raise  and  fear  Me  Alone/  Indeed,  Allah  Alone  deserves 
to  be  feared. 

Allah  said: 

4 . . .so  that  I  may  complete  My  blessings  on  you.} 

This  Ayah  relates  to  Allah's  statement: 

4... so  that  men  may  have  no  argument  against  you}, 

meaning:  I  will  perfect  My  bounty  on  you  by  legislating  for  you 
to  face  the  Ka‘bah,  so  that  the  (Islamic)  SharVah  (law)  is 
complete  in  every  respect.  Allah  said: 


4... that  you  may  be  guided.}, 

meaning:  To  be  directed  and  guided  to  what  the  nations  have 
been  led  astray  from.  We  have  guided  you  to  it  and  preferred 
you  with  it.’  This  is  why  this  Ummah  is  the  best  and  most 
honored  nation  ever. 


%  4  1^5  VP  f)  U 


4151.  Similarly  (to  complete  My  blessings  on  you),  We  have 

sent  among  you  a  Messenger  ( Muhammad  of  your  own, 

reciting  to  you  Our  verses  (the  Qur’an)  and  purifying  you,  and 
teaching  you  the  Book  (the  Qur’an)  and  the  Hikmah  (i.e., 
Suntiah,  Islamic  laws  and  Fiqh  -  jurisprudence),  and  teaching 
you  that  which  you  did  not  know.} 

4152.  Therefore  remember  Me  (by  praying,  glorifying).  I  will 
remember  you,  and  be  gratefyl  to  Me  (for  My  countless  favors 
on  you)  and  never  be  ungratefyl  to  Me.} 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174 )  (Part-2) 


439 


Muhammad’s  Prophecy  is  a  Great  Bounty  from  Allah 

Allah  reminds  His  believing  servants  with  what  He  has  endowed 
them  with  by  sending  Muhammad  sg  as  a  Messenger  to  them, 
reciting  to  them  Allah’s  clear  Ay  at  and  purifying  and  cleansing 
them  from  the  worst  types  of  behavior,  the  ills  of  the  souls  and 
the  acts  of  Jdhiliyyah  (pre-Islamic  era).  The  Messenger  jg  also 
takes  them  away  from  the  darkness  (of  disbelief)  to  the  light  (of 
faith)  and  teaches  them  the  Book,  the  Qur’an,  and  the  Hikmah 
(i.e.,  the  wisdom),  which  is  his  Sunnah.  He  also  teaches  them 
what  they  knew  not.  During  the  time  of  Jdhiliyyah,  they  used 
to  utter  foolish  statements.  Later  on,  and  with  the  blessing  of 
the  Prophet’s  Message  and  the  goodness  of  his  prophecy,  they 
were  elevated  to  the  status  of  the  Awliya’  (loyal  friends  of  Allah) 
and  the  rank  of  the  scholars.  Hence,  they  acquired  the  deepest 
knowledge  among  the  people,  the  most  pious  hearts,  and  the 
most  truthful  tongues.  Allah  said: 


*  * 


ilndeed,  Allah  conferred  a  great  favor  on  the  believers  when  He 
sent  among  them  a  Messenger  (Muhammad  sg)  from  among 
themselves,  reciting  unto  them  His  verses  (the  Qur'an),  and 
purifying  them  (from  sins).}  (3:164) 

Allah  also  criticized  those  who  did  not  give  this  bounty  its 
due  consideration,  when  He  said: 


iJ4'  $  &  £2  J)  J 


iHave  you  not  seen  those  who  have  changed  the  favors  of  Allah 
into  disbelief  (by  denying  Prophet  Muhammad  sg)  and  his 
Message  of  Islam),  and  caused  their  people  to  dwell  in  the  house 
of  destruction?}  (14:28) 

Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented,  “Allah’s  favor  means  Muhammad.”*11 
Therefore,  Allah  has  commanded  the  believers  to  affirm  this 
favor  and  to  appreciate  it  by  thanking  and  remembering  Him: 


^Therefore,  remember  Me.  I  will  remember  you,  and  be  grateful 
to  Me,  and  never  be  ungrateful  to  Me.} 

111  M-Bukhari  no.  3977. 


440 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Mujahid  said  that  Allah’s  statement: 

'iyfj  y*  CS”^ 

^ Similarly  (to  complete  My  favor  on  you),  We  have  sent  among 
you  a  Messenger  (Mulutmmad  0)  of  your  own,$ 

means:  Therefore,  remember  Me  in  gratitude  to  My  favor.11* 
Al-Hasan  Al-Basri  commented  about  Allah’s  statement: 


4' Therefore  remember  Me.  I  will  remember  you)>, 


“Remember  Me  regarding  what  I  have  commanded  you  and  I 
will  remember  you  regarding  what  I  have  compelled  Myself  to 
do  for  your  benefit  (i.e.,  His  rewards  and  forgiveness).”*2* 

An  authentic  Hadith  states: 


%  J  cfj  J  J.  Jt'P  if*  ’■  &* 


U 

flAla 


nAllah  the  Exalted  said,  'Whoever  mentions  Me  to  himself, 
then  I  will  mention  him  to  Myself;  and  whoever  mentions  Me 
in  a  gathering,  I  will  mention  him  in  a  better  gathering .»’*3' 

Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  Anas  narrated  that  Allah’s 
Messenger  said: 


o\  j±  <j.  Jr'J*  ‘f-5’  6^’  *■-  3*  ^*  <-*b» 

o\j  -  f~*-  ^  j*  -  j*  ^  j?')** 

jlj  t  IpU  Iplji  iZj y$  jjj  4 0^0 

®  aJj  ijUbujl  ^ 


tAllah  the  Exalted  said,  ‘O  son  of  Adam!  If  you  mention  Me  to 
yourself,  1  will  mention  you  to  Myself.  If  you  mention  Me  in  a 
gathering,  I  will  mention  you  in  a  gathering  of  the  angels  (or 
said  in  a  better  gathering).  If  you  draw  closer  to  Me  by  a  hand 
span,  I  will  draw  closer  to  you  by  forearm's  length.  If  you  draw 
closer  to  Me  by  a  forearm's  length,  I  will  draiv  closer  to  you  by 
an  arm’s  length.  And  if  you  come  to  Me  walking,  I  will  come 


111  At-Tabari  3:210. 

*2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:141. 
131  FathAl-Bari  13:395. 


Surah.  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  274)  (Part-2) 


442 


Jr 


z. 


•  \  >**'  < 


v. 


J^V'o^o^J 

<i' ^ULi< » 4^* t) ' S\%$  0  0_>jcL£iJ'£i 
<L£j'6'6  0 

<J>'py  1ll> jll'jf 


to  you  running ». 

Its  chain  is  Sahib,  it 
was  recorded  by  Al- 
Bukhari.’11  Allah 
said: 

4«$fc  %  a  ^(;» 

i...and  be  grateful  to 
Me  (for  My  countless 
favors  on  you)  and 
never  be  ungrateful  to 
Me.» 

In  this  Ayah,  Allah 
commands  that  He  be 
thanked  and 
appreciated,  and 
promises  even  more 
rewards  for  thanking 
Him.  Allah  said  in 
another  Ayah: 

oS  ’fSj  i 

jfSic.  jl  ’{ja£=. 


iAnd  (remember) 

when  your  Lord  proclaimed:  "If  you  give  thanks  (by  accepting 
faith  and  worshipping  none  but  Allah),  I  will  give  you  more  (of 
My  blessings);  but  if  you  are  thankless  (i.e.,  disbelievers), 
verily,  My  punishment  is  indeed  severe. ^ 

Abu  Raja’  Al-Utandi  said:  Imran  bin  Husayn  came  by  us 
once  wearing  a  nice  silken  garment  that  we  never  saw  him 
wear  before  or  afterwards.  He  said,  “Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said: 

£jj  Jlij  Jj**i  jil  ijji  of  Sll  O^i  il*j  *1 Ip  <Jil  jO*jf  j*1 

«.jl*  JU»  :ly> 

“Those  whom  Allah  has  favored  with  a  bounty,  then  Allah  likes 


m  Ahmad  3:138,  FathAl-Bdri  13:521 . 


442 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


to  see  the  effect  of  His  bounty  on  His  creation »,  or  he  said,  “on 
His  servant”  -  according  to  Ruh  (one  of  the  narrators  of 
the  Hadith).^ 


Jsju  JJ  'Jj  £  ii?  o>  !A*'* 


4: i  J 3;  *1  >  M  A 


4253.  O  i/om  u>/io  believe!  Seek  help  in  patience  and  As-Saldh 
(the  prayer).  Truly,  Allah  is  with  As-Sabirfn  (the  patient).} 

4154.  And  say  not  of  those  who  are  killed  in  the  way  of  Allah, 
"They  are  dead."  Nay,  they  are  living,  but  you  perceive  (it) 
not.} 


The  Virtue  of  Patience  and  Prayer 


After  Allah  commanded  that  He  be  appreciated,  He  ordained 
patience  and  prayer.  It  is  a  fact  that  the  servant  is  either 
enjoying  a  bounty  that  he  should  be  thankful  for,  or  suffering 
a  calamity  that  he  should  meet  with  patience.  A  Hadith  states: 


/Is  t\/ 


nid 


■  jlS  /as 


« Amazing  is  the  believer,  for  \ whatever  Allah  decrees  for  hint,  it 
is  better  for  him!  If  he  is  tested  ivith  a  bounty,  he  is  grateful  for 
it  and  this  is  better  for  him;  and  if  he  is  afflicted  with  a 
hardship,  he  is  patient  ivith  it  and  this  is  better  for  /iiw.»*2* 

Allah  has  stated  that  the  best  tools  to  help  ease  the  effects 
of  the  afflictions  are  patience  and  prayer.  Earlier  we  mentioned 
Allah’s  statement: 


4And  seek  help  in  patience  and  As-Saldh  (the  prayer)  and  trtdy, 
it  is  extremely  heavy  and  hard  except  for  Al-Khdshi'in  fi.e.,  the 
true  believers  in  Allah]}  (2:45) 

There  are  several  types  of  Sa.br  —  patience:  one  for  avoiding 
the  prohibitions  and  sins,  one  for  acts  of  worship  and 
obedience.  The  second  type  carries  more  rewards  than  the  first 


I1'  Ahmad  4  :438. 
121  Muslim  4:2292. 


443 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174}  (Part-2) 

type.  There  is  a  third  type  of  patience  required  in  the  face  of 
the  afflictions  and  hardships,  which  is  mandatory,  like 
repentance. 

‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Zayd  bin  Aslam  said,  “Safer  has  two 
parts:  patience  for  the  sake  of  Allah  concerning  what  He  is 
pleased  with  (i.e.,  acts  of  worship  and  obedience),  even  if  it  is 
hard  on  the  heart  and  the  body,  and  patience  when  avoiding 
what  He  dislikes,  even  if  it  is  desired.  Those  who  acquire  these 
qualities  will  be  among  the  patient  persons  whom  Allah  shall 
greet  (when  they  meet  Him  in  the  Hereafter;  refer  to  Surat  Al- 
Ahizab  33:44),  Allah  willing.”'11 


The  Life  enjoyed  by  Martyrs 

Allah’s  statement: 


4 And  say  not  of  those  who  are  killed  in  the  way  of  Allah,  " They  are 
dead.”  Nay,  they  are  living, 4  indicates  that  the  martyrs  are  alive 
and  receiving  their  sustenance. 

Muslim  reported  in  his  Sahth : 


liU  :  Jlli  Sijj  (A) 

•j»  \jJ-\  Jaju  A  ti  L:lLpl  Ji_)  5,/i  ( llj j  Ij  :  I f  lli  ?  j 

iji  Jjy  :  t  I^JUw  ji  S  1  \j I j  L «JU  t  Ijia  ^  g .  1)  jIa 

Ji  tIJ  -  tS'yA  t'j*  klUi  JlL-l  yt  JjliJ  UliJl  jljdl  jjl 

■  V  l^Jl  pjjl  c3  (A»-  J yf  -  jStgJLjl  _jl 


"The  souls  of  the  martyrs  are  inside  green  birds  and  move  about 
in  Paradise  wherever  they  wish.  Then,  they  take  refuge  in 
lamps  that  are  hanging  under  the  Throne  (of  Allah).  Your  Lord 
looked  at  them  and  asked  them,  'What  do  you  wish  for?'  They 
said,  'What  more  could  we  wish  for  while  You  have  favored  us 
with  what  You  have  not  favored  any  other  of  your  creation?'  He 
repeated  the  question  again .  When  they  realize  lhal  they  will  be 
asked  (until  they  answer),  they  said,  We  wish  that  You  send 


|il 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :144. 


445 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174 )  (Part-2) 


4  And  surely,  We  shall  try  you  till  We  test  those  who  strive 
hard  (for  the  cause  of  Allah)  and  As-Sabirfn  (the  patient),  and 
We  shall  test  your  facts  (i.e.,  the  one  who  is  a  liar,  and  the  one 
who  is  truthful).)  (47:31) 

Hence,  He  tests  them  with  the  bounty  sometimes  and 
sometimes  with  the  afflictions  of  fear  and  hunger.  Allah  said 
in  another  Ayah : 

4So  Allah  made  it  taste  extreme  of  hunger  (famine)  and  fear.) 
(16:112) 

The  frightened  and  the  hungry  persons  show  the  effects  of 
the  affliction  outwardly  and  this  is  why  Allah  has  used  here 
the  word  'Libas’  (cover  or  clothes)  of  fear  and  hunger.  In  the 
Ayat  above,  Allah  used  the  words: 

i'j  H,  }&>¥ 


iwith  something  of  fear,  hunger,)  meaning,  a  little  of  each. 
Then  (Allah  said), 


lit  sjjZfr 


iloss  of  wealth,  ) 

meaning,  some  of  the  wealth  will  be  destroyed, 


Olives)  meaning,  losing  friends,  relatives  and  loved  ones  to 
death, 

iattd  fruits meaning,  the  gardens  and  the  farms  will  not 
produce  the  usual  or  expected  amounts.  This  is  why  Allah  said 
next: 


ibut  give  glad  tidings  to  As-Sdbinn  (the  patient ).  $ 

He  then  explained  whom  He  meant  by  ‘the  patient1  whom  He 
praised: 


446 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kqtlm 


5  'H 


iWlw,  when  afflicted  with  calamity,  say:  "Truly,  to  Allah  we 
belong  and  truly,  to  Him  we  shall  return /> 


meaning,  those  who  recite  this  statement  to  comfort 
themselves  in  the  face  of  their  loss,  know  that  they  belong  to 
Allah  and  that  He  does  what  He  wills  with  His  servants.  They 
also  know  that  nothing  and  no  deed,  even  if  it  was  the  weight 
of  an  atom,  will  be  lost  with  Allah  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection. 
These  facts  thus  compel  them  to  admit  that  they  are  Allah’s 
servants  and  that  their  return  will  be  to  Him  in  the  Hereafter. 

This  is  why  Allah  said: 


iThey  are  those  on  whom  are  the  Salawdt  (i.e.,  who  are  blessed 
and  will  be  forgiven)  from  their  Lord,  and  (they  are  those  who) 
receive  His  mercy,  i 

meaning,  Allah’s  praise  and  mercy  will  be  with  them.  Said  bin 
Jubayr  added,  “Meaning,  safety  from  the  torment.’’111 


iand  it  is  they  who  are  the  guided  ones .  ^  Umar  bin  Al- 
Khattab  commented:  “What  righteous  things,  and  what  a 
great  heights. 


iThey  are  those  on  whom  are  the  Salawdt  from  their  Lord,  and 
(they  are  those  who)  receive  His  mercyi  are  the  two  righteous 
things. 


iand  it  is  they  who  are  the  guided  ones i  are  the  heights.”121 

The  heights  means  more  rewards,  and  these  people  will  be 
awarded  their  rewards  and  more. 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :158. 
121  Al-Hakim  2:270. 


447 


Surat  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  - 174)  (Port-2) 

The  Virtue  of  asserting  that  We  all  belong  to  Allah, 
during  Afflictions 

There  are  several  Ahadith  that  mention  the  rewards  of 
admitting  that  the  return  is  to  Allah  by  saying: 


'Truly,  to  Allah  ive  belong  and  truly,  to  Hint  we  shall 
return. 


when  afflictions  strike.  For  instance,  Imam  Ahmad  reported 
that  Umm  Salamah  narrated:  Once,  Abu  Salamah  came  back 
after  he  was  with  Allah’s  Messenger  sg  and  said:  I  heard 
Allah’s  Messenger  jg  recite  a  statement  that  made  me 
delighted.  He  said: 


JlJi  Jii  ''Ji  A \'f>-  J~r A 


iNo  Muslim  is  struck  with  an  affliction  and  then  says  Istirjd' 
when  the  affliction  strikes,  and  then  says :  'O  Allah!  Reioard  me 
for  my  loss  and  give  me  what  is  better  than  it,'  but  Allah  will 
do  just  that. » 

Umm  Salamah  said:  So  I  memorized  these  words.  When  Abu 
Salamah  died  I  said  Istirjd ‘  and  said:  “O  Allah!  Compensate  me 
for  my  loss  and  give  me  what  is  better  than  it.”  I  then  thought 
about  it  and  said,  “Who  is  better  than  Abu  Salamah?”  When 
my  ‘Iddah  (the  period  of  time  before  the  widow  or  divorced 
woman  can  remarry)  finished,  Allah’s  Messenger  asked  for 
permission  to  see  me  while  I  was  dyeing  a  skin  that  I  had.  I 
washed  my  hands,  gave  him  permission  to  enter  and  handed 
him  a  pillow,  and  he  sat  on  it.  He  then  asked  me  for  marriage 
and  when  he  finished  his  speech,  I  said,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah! 
It  is  not  because  I  do  not  want  you,  but  I  am  very  jealous  and  I 
fear  that  you  might  experience  some  wrong  mannerism  from 
me  for  which  Allah  would  punish  me.  I  am  old  and  have 
children.” 

He  said: 


y  U  €\j  J y  Jill  4^1;  y  U 

A u#  j&Ji  y  u  jL  j,yA\  Aii 


448 


Tgfsir  Ibn  Kathir 

“As  for  the  jealousy  that  you  mentioned,  Allah  the  Exalted  will 
remove  it  from  you.  As  for  your  being  old  as  you  mentioned,  I 
have  suffered  what  you  have  suffered.  And  for  your  having 
children,  they  are  my  children  too.o 

She  said,  “I  have  surrendered  to  Allah’s  Messenger.”  Allah’s 
Messenger  jg  married  her  and  Umm  Salamah  said  later,  “Allah 
compensated  me  with  who  is  better  them  Abu  Salamah:  Allah’s 
Messenger  sg.”*11  Muslim  reported  a  shorter  version  of  this 
HadithJ21 


^  fjc.  iii  oji  Cj*-  l» ^ 


4158.  Verily,  As-Safd  and  Al-Marwah 131  are  of  the  symbols  of 
Allah.  So  it  is  not  a  sin  on  him  who  performs  Hajj  or  'Umrah 
(pilgrimage)  of  the  House  to  perform  Tawdf  between  them .  And 
whoever  does  good  voluntarily,  then  verily,  Allah  is  All- 
Recognizer,  All-Knoioer f. 


The  Meaning  of  “it  is  not  a  sin”  in  the  Ayah 

Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  ‘Urwah  said  that  he  asked 
‘A’ishah  about  what  Allah  stated: 


4  Verily,  As-Safd  and  Al-Marwah  (two  mountains  in  Makkah) 
are  of  the  symbols  of  Allah .  So  it  is  not  a  sin  on  him  who 
performs  Hajj  or  'Umrah  (pilgrimage)  of  the  House  (the  Ka'bah 
at  Makkah)  to  perform  the  going  (Tawdf)  between  them  (As-Safd 
and  Al-Marwah). $ 

"By  Allah!  It  is  not  a  sin  if  someone  did  not  perform  Tawdf 
around  them.”  ‘A’ishah  said,  “Worst  is  that  which  you  said,  O 
my  nephew!  If  this  is  the  meaning  of  it,  it  should  have  read,  It 


111  Ahmad  4:27. 

121  Muslim  2:633. 

The  names  of  the  two  small  mountains  that  the  pilgrims  walk  and 
run  between  during  the  rites  of  (Umrah. 


449 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174)  (Part-2) 


is  not  a  sin  if  one  did  not  perform  Tawaf  around  them/ 
Rather,  the  Ayah  was  revealed  regarding  the  Ansar,  who 
before  Islam,  used  to  assume  Ihlal  (or  Ihram  for  Hajj)  in  the 
area  of  Mushallal  for  their  idol  Manat  that  they  used  to 
worship.  Those  who  assumed  Ihlal  for  Manat,  used  to  hesitate 
to  perform  Tawaf  (going)  between  Mounts  As-Safa  and  Al- 
Marwah.  So  they  (during  the  Islamic  era)  asked  Allah’s 
Messenger  about  it,  saying,  ‘O  Messenger  of  Allah!  During 
the  time  of  Jdhiliyyah ,  we  used  to  hesitate  to  perform  Tawaf 
between  As-Safa  and  Al-Marwah/  Allah  then  revealed: 


iVerily,  As-Safa  and  Al-Marwah  are  of  the  symbols  of  Allah. 

So  it  is  not  a  sin  on  him  who  performs  Hajj  or  ‘Umrah  of  the 
House  to  perform  the  going  (T aivdf)  between  titan. y 

‘A’ishah  then  said,  “  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  has  made  it  the 
Sunnah  to  perform  Tawaf  between  them  (As-Safa  and  Al- 
Marwah),  and  thus,  no  one  should  abandon  performing  Tawaf 
between  them.”*'1  This  Haciith  is  reported  in  the  SahXhayn. 

In  another  narration,  Imam  Az-Zuhri  reported  that  TJrwah 
said:  Later  on  I  (TJrwah)  told  Abu  Bakr  bin  ‘Abdur-Rahman 
bin  Al-Harith  bin  Hisham  (of  ‘A ’is hah ’s  statement)  and  he  said, 
“I  have  not  heard  of  such  information.  However,  I  heard 
learned  men  saying  that  all  the  people,  except  those  whom 
‘A’ishah  mentioned,  said,  ‘Our  Tawaf  between  these  two  hills 
is  a  practice  of  Jahiliyyah.’  Some  others  among  the  Ansar 
said,  We  were  commanded  to  perform  Tawaf  of  the  Ka'bah, 
but  not  between  As-Safa  and  Al-Marwah.’  So  Allah  revealed: 


iVerily,  As-Safa  and  Al-Marwah  are  of  the  symbols  of  Allah. y 

Abu  Bakr  bin  ‘Abdur-Rahman  then  said,  “It  seems  that  this 
verse  was  revealed  concerning  the  two  groups.”  ^  Al-Bukhari 
collected  a  similar  narration  by  Anas. 

Ash-ShaTii  said,  “fsaf  (an  idol)  was  on  As-Safa  while  Na’ilah 


Ahmad  6:144. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  3 :58 1 ,  and  Muslim  2  :929 . 


450 


Tgfsir  Jbn  Kathir 

(an  idol)  was  on  Al-Marwah,  and  they  used  to  touch  (or  kiss) 
them.  After  Islam  came,  they  were  hesitant  about  performing 
Tawaf  between  them.  Thereafter,  the  Ayah  (2:158  above)  was 
revealed.” 

The  Wisdom  behind  legislating  Sa‘i  between  As-Saia 
and  Al-Marwah 

Muslim  recorded  a  long  Hadith  in  his  Sahih  from  Jabir,  in 
which  Allah’s  Messenger  sg  finished  the  Tawaf  around  the 
House,  and  then  went  back  to  the  Rukn  (pillar,  i.e.,  the  Black 
Stone)  and  kissed  it.  He  then  went  out  from  the  door  near  As- 
Saia  while  reciting: 

4  C/t  jl  ^ 

iVerily,  As-Safd  and  Al-Manvah  are  of  the  symbols  of  Allah. $ 

The  Prophet  then  said,  «/  start  with  what  Allah  has  commanded 
me  to  start  with  [meaning  start  the  Sa'i  (i.e.,  fast  walking)  from  the 
As-Safaft.  In  another  narration  of  An-Nasa’i,  the  Prophet  si 
said,  u Start  with  what  Allah  has  started  with  (i.e.,  As-Safd) 

Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  Hablbah  bint  Abu  Tajrah  said,  “I 
saw  Allah’s  Messenger  si  performing  Tawaf  between  As-Safa 
and  Al-Marwah,  while  the  people  were  in  front  of  him  and  he 
was  behind  them  walking  in  Sa'L  I  saw  his  garment  twisted 
around  his  knees  because  of  the  fast  walking  in  Sa'i  (he  was 
performing)  and  he  was  reciting: 

.t^ui  'Jdi-  ecs  s>i  i^it 

^Perform  Sa'i,  for  Allah  has  prescribed  Sa'i  on  i /oh."’”*2' 

This  Hadith  was  used  as  a  proof  for  the  fact  that  Sa  ‘i  is  a 
Rukn)3^  of  Hajj.  It  was  also  said  that  Sa'i  is  Wajib}^  and  not 
a  Rukn  of  Hajj  and  that  if  one  does  not  perform  it  by  mistake 
or  by  intention,  he  could  expiate  the  shortcoming  with 


I1*  Muslim  and  An-Nasa’i  5 :239. 

Ahmad  6 :42 1 . 

^  A  pillar,  which  if  not  performed,  then  the  act  of  worship  must  be 
repeated . 

An  obligatory  element,  which  if  not  performed  can  be  expiated  as 
directed . 


451 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174)  (Part-2) 

Damm.1'1  Allah  has  stated  that  Tawaf  between  As- Safa  and 
Al-Marwah  is  among  the  symbols  of  Allah,  meaning,  among 
the  acts  that  Allah  legislated  during  the  Hajj  for  Prophet 
Ibrahim. 

Earlier  we  mentioned  the  Hadith  by  Ibn  ‘Abbas  that  the 
origin  of  Tawaf  comes  from  the  Tawaf  of  Hajar  (Prophet 
Ibrahim’s  wife),  between  As-Safa  and  Al-Marwah  seeking  water 
for  her  son  (Isma'il)  Ibrahim  had  left  them  in  Makkah,  where 
there  was  no  habitation  for  her.  When  Hajar  feared  that  her 
son  would  die,  she  stood  up  and  begged  Allah  for  His  help  and 
kept  going  back  and  forth  in  that  blessed  area  between  As- 
Saia  and  Al-Marwah.  She  was  humble,  fearful,  frightened  and 
meek  before  Allah.  Allah  answered  her  prayers,  relieved  her  of 
her  loneliness,  ended  her  dilemma  and  made  the  well  of 
Zamzam  bring  forth  its  water  for  her,  which  is: 

+  * 

« A  tasty  (or  nutritional)  food  and  a  remedy  for  the  illness .» 

Therefore,  whoever  performs  Sa‘i  between  As-Safa  and  Al- 
Marwah  should  remember  his  meekness,  humbleness  and 
need  for  Allah  to  guide  his  heart,  lead  his  affairs  to  success 
and  forgive  his  sins.  He  should  also  want  Allah  to  eliminate 
his  shortcomings  and  errors  and  to  guide  him  to  the  straight 
path.  He  should  ask  Allah  to  keep  him  firm  on  this  path  until 
he  meets  death,  and  to  change  his  situation  from  that  of  sin 
and  errors  to  that  of  perfection  and  being  forgiven,  —  the 
same  providence  which  was  provided  to  Hajar. 

Allah  then  states: 

4^  && 

iAnd  whoever  does  good  voluntarily .  ^ 

It  was  said  that  the  Ayah  describes  performing  Tawaf  more 
than  seven  times,  it  was  also  said  that  it  refers  to  voluntary 
' Umrah  or  Hajj.  It  was  also  said  that  it  means  volunteering  to 
do  good  works  in  general,  as  Ar-Razi  has  stated.  The  third 
opinion  was  attributed  to  Al-Hasan  Al-Basri.^  Allah  knows 
best. 

^  A  form  of  expiation  in  which  an  animal  is  slaughtered  in  Makkah 
and  distributed  among  the  poor . 

[2)  Ar-Razi  4:146. 


452 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Allah  states: 


4... then  verily,  Allah  is  All-Recognizer,  All-Knower .} 


meaning,  Allah’s  reward  is  immense  for  the  little  deed,  and  He 
knows  about  the  sufficiency  of  the  reward.  Hence,  He  will  not 
award  insufficient  rewards  to  anyone.  Indeed: 


tit  jui*  1 v  si' 


iSurely,  Allah  wrongs  not  even  of  the  weight  of  an  atom,  but 
if  there  is  any  good  (done),  He  doubles  it,  and  gives  from  Him 
a  great  reward.}  (4:40) 


JUjl  C  Jj;  hi  ZJ&J  $£$  u  G# 1  1$  5»> 

dLdjtS  1 (f.P  rr^.j  & 

■$4&i  &  &  &  %  ft  !&  kP  k  <% 


4159.  Verily,  tlwse  who  conceal  the  clear  proofs,  evidences  and 
the  guidance,  which  We  have  sent  down,  after  We  have  made  it 
clear  for  the  People  in  the  Book,  they  are  the  ones  cursed  by 
Allah  and  cursed  by  the  cursers.} 

41 60.  Except  those  who  repent  and  do  righteous  deeds,  and 
openly  declare  (the  truth  which  they  concealed).  These,  l  will 
accept  their  repentance.  And  I  am  the  One  Wlw  accepts 
repentance,  the  Most  Merciful.} 

4161.  Verily,  those  who  disbelieve,  and  die  while  they  are 
disbelievers,  it  is  they  on  whom  is  the  curse  of  Allah  and  of  the 
angels  and  of  mankind,  combined.} 

4162.  They  will  abide  therein  (under  the  curse  in  Hell),  their 
punishment  will  neither  be  lightened  nor  will  they  be 
reprieved}. 


The  Eternal  Curse  for  Those  Who  hide  Religious 
Commandments 

These  Ayat  sternly  warn  against  those  who  hide  the  clear 
signs  that  the  Messengers  were  sent  with  which  guide  to  the 
correct  path  and  beneficial  guidance  for  the  hearts,  after  Allah 


453 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174)  (Part- 2) 

has  made  such  aspects  clear  for  His  servants  through  the 
Books  that  He  revealed  to  His  Messengers.  Abu  Al-'Aliyah  said 
that  these  Ayat ,  "were  revealed  about  the  People  of  the 
Scripture  who  hid  the  description  of  Muhammad  Allah 

then  states  that  everything  curses  such  people  for  this  evil  act. 
Certainly,  just  as  everything  asks  for  forgiveness  for  the 
scholar,  even  the  fish  in  the  sea  and  the  bird  in  the  air,  then 
those  who  hide  knowledge  are  cursed  by  Allah  and  by  the 
cursers. 

A  Hadith  in  the  Musnad ,  narrated  through  several  chains  of 
narrators,  that  strengthens  the  overall  judgment  of  the  Hadith, 
states  that  Abu  Hurayrah  narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  fg 
said: 

0  0 

« Whoever  was  asked  about  knowledge  that  one  has,  but  he  hid 
it,  then  a  bridle  made  of  fire  will  be  tied  around  his  mouth  on 
the  Day  of  Resurrection.^ 

It  is  also  recorded  by  Al-Bukhari  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said,  “If 
it  was  not  for  an  Ayah  in  Allah’s  Book,  I  would  not  have 
narrated  a  Hadith  for  anyone: 

oSd'  Si  G0  £ 

iVerily,  those  who  conceal  the  clear  proofs,  evidences  and  the 
guidance,  which  We  have  sent  down 

Mujahid  said,  “When  the  earth  is  struck  by  drought,  the 
animals  say,  This  is  because  of  the  sinners  among  the 
Children  of  Adam.  May  Allah  curse  the  sinners  among  the 
Children  of  Adam.’”*4' 

Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  and  Qatadah  said  that 

iand  cursed  by  the  cursers ^ 

means  that  the  angels  and  the  believers  will  curse  them.'5’ 

,,l  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :170. 

|2>  Ahmad  2:495. 

131  Fath  Al-Bari  1 :258. 

(4'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:175. 

'5'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:174. 


454 


Tgfstr  Ibn  Kathir 

Moreover,  a  Hadith  states  that  everything,  including  the  fish  in 
the  sea,  asks  for  forgiveness  for  the  scholars.  The  Ayah  (2:159 
above)  states  that  those  who  hide  the  knowledge  will  be 
cursed,  (in  this  life  and)  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection,  by  Allah, 
the  angels,  all  humanity,  and  those  who  curse  (including  the 
animals)  each  in  its  own  distinct  way.  Allah  knows  best. 

From  this  punishment,  Allah  excluded  sill  who  repent  to 
Him: 


iExcept  those  who  repent  and  do  righteous  deeds,  and  openly 
declare  (the  truth  which  they  concealed).  > 

This  Ayah  refers  to  those  who  regret  what  they  have  been 
doing  and  correct  their  behavior  and,  thus,  explain  to  the 
people  what  they  have  been  hiding. 


iThese,  I  will  accept  their  repentance.  And  I  am  the  One  Wlw 
accepts  repentance,  the  Most  Merciful.  4 

This  Ayah  also  indicates  that  those  who  used  to  call  to 
innovation,  or  even  disbelief,  and  repent  to  Allah,  then  Allah 
will  forgive  them.  Allah  afterwards  states  that  those  who 
disbelieve  in  Him  and  remain  in  this  state  until  they  die,  then: 


rg. 


4it  is  they  on  whom  is  the  curse  of  Allah  and  of  the  angels  and 
of  mankind,  combined.  They  ivill  abide  therein  (under  the  curse 
in  Hell).  ^ 

Therefore,  they  will  suffer  the  eternal  curse  until  the  Day  of 
Resurrection  and  after  that  in  the  fire  of  Jahannam,  where, 

44.&K  ^  y)» 


4  their  punishment  ivill  neither  be  lightened 
Hence,  the  torment  will  not  be  decreased  for  them, 


4 nor  will  they  be  reprieved.  } 

The  torment  will  not  be  changed  or  tempered  for  even  an 
hour.  Rather,  it  is  continuous  and  eternal.  We  seek  refuge 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174}  (Part-2) 
with  Allah  from  this  evil  end. 


455 


Cursing  the  Disbelievers  is  allowed 


There  is  no  disagreement  that  it  is  lawful  to  curse  the 
disbelievers.  ‘Umar  bin  Al-Khattab  and  the  Imams  after  him 
used  to  curse  the  disbelievers  in  their  Qunut  (a  type  of 
supplication)  during  the  prayer  and  otherwise.  As  for  cursing  a 
specific  disbeliever,  some  scholars  stated  that  it  is  not  allowed 
to  curse  him,  because  we  do  not  know  how  Allah  will  make 
his  end.  Others  said  that  it  is  allowed  to  curse  individual 
disbelievers.  For  proof,  they  mention  the  story  about  the  man 
who  was  brought  to  be  punished  repeatedly  for  drinking 
(alcohol),  a  man  said,  “May  Allah  curse  him!  He  is  being 
brought  repeatedly  (to  be  flogged  for  drinking).”  Allah’s 
Messenger  said: 


,  i  >  f.j  ii/N  V'T 
®  aJ  AU 1  4j  8 


“Do  not  curse  him,  for  he  loves  Allah  and  His  Messenger®.1'1 

This  Hadith  indicates  that  it  is  allowed  to  curse  those  who 
do  not  love  Allah  and  His  Messenger  jfc.  Allah  knows  best. 


^  2  -n  A  V  is  A  && 


4163.  And  your  Halt  (Cod)  is  One  Hah  (God  -  Allah),  La 
ildha  ilia  Huwa  (there  is  none  who  has  the  right  to  be 
worshipped  but  He),  the  Most  Gracious,  the  Most  Merciful.) 

In  this  Ayah,  Allah  mentions  that  He  is  the  only  deity,  and 
that  He  has  no  partners  or  equals.  He  is  Allah,  the  One  and 
Only,  the  Sustainer,  and  there  is  no  deity  worthy  of  worship 
except  Him.  He  is  the  Most  Gracious  —  Ar-Rahman,  the  Most 
Merciful  —  Ar-Rahlm.  We  explained  the  meanings  of  these  two 
Names  in  the  beginning  of  Surat  Al-Fatihah.  Shahr  bin 
Hawshab  reported  that  Asma’  bint  Yazld  bin  As-Sakan 
narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jfe  said: 

o£Yl  J  jil  jU-l® 


* Allah’s  Greatest  Name  is  contained  in  these  hvo  AydtK 


i&JBf  *  A  A  is  ’A 


Abdur-Razz&q  7 :381 ,  similar  with  Al-Bukhari,  no.  6780. 


456 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

iAnd  your  Ilah  (God)  is 
One  Ilah  (God  -  Al¬ 
lah),  Ld  ilaha  ilia  Huwa 
(there  is  none  who  has 
the  right  to  be  wor¬ 
shipped  but  He),  the 
Most  Gracious,  the 
Most  Merciful.}  and: 

jJI  ijj  V  S»f  £$} 

iAlif-Ldm-Mim .  Allah! 
Ld  ilaha  ilia  Huwa  (none 
has  the  right  to  be  wor¬ 
shipped  but  He),  Al- 
Haiytil-Qaiyum  (the 
Ever  Living,  the  One 
Wlw  sustains  and  pro¬ 
tects  all  that  exists).} 
(3:1,  2)”m 

Then  Allah 
mentions  some  of  the 
proof  that  He  is  alone 
as  the  deity,  that  He 
is  the  One  who 
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth  and  all  of  the  various 
creatures  between  them,  all  of  which  testify  to  His  Oneness. 
Allah  said: 


J 


vm* sSp  Vi 

Lvl  ySj 

I  dUJjjSj 

^ (jA  \  (jA 

W->ULii  \j  gQ  \  joTS 

0j£  1S1  *J\S 

i/j 5  \  J\5j  i  lijajj 

i Vj  tllL  W i>l5oi\SJ  \ 

0 


4  c^'  jtjlifj  4-^'  j 

02  *-*->  A»  Lj  ^.Ult 

yu  J  ylwJlj  uUp«j  iilj 


4164.  Verily,  in  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and 
in  the  alternation  of  night  and  day,  and  the  ships  which  sail 
through  the  sea  with  that  which  is  of  use  to  mankind,  and  the 
water  (rain)  which  Allah  sends  down  from  the  sky  and  makes 


m  Abu  DSwud  2:168. 


457 


Stir  ah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174 )  (Part-  2) 

the  earth  alive  therewith  after  its  death,  and  the  moving  (living) 
creatures  of  all  kinds  that  He  has  scattered  therein,  and  in  the 
veering  of  winds  and  clouds  which  are  held  between  the  sky  and 
the  earth,  are  indeed  Ayat  (proofs,  evidences,  signs,  etc.)  for 
people  of  understanding.} 


The  Proofs  for  Tawhld 

Allah  said: 


4 Verily ,  in  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth...  } 
Therefore,  the  sky,  with  its  height,  intricate  design,  vastness, 
the  heavenly  objects  in  orbit,  and  this  earth,  with  its  density, 
its  lowlands,  mountains,  seas,  deserts,  valleys,  and  other 
structures,  and  beneficial  things  that  it  has.  Allah  continues: 


4... and  in  the  alternation  of  night  and  day.} 

This  (the  night)  comes  and  then  goes  followed  by  the  other 
(the  day)  which  does  not  delay  for  even  an  instant,  just  as 
Allah  said: 


4It  is  not  for  the  sun  to  overtake  tlte  moon,  nor  does  the  night 
outstrip  the  day.  They  all  float,  each  in  an  orbit.}  (36:40) 


Sometimes,  the  day  grows  shorter  and  the  night  longer,  and 
sometimes  vice  versa,  one  takes  from  the  length  of  the  other. 
Similarly  Allah  said: 


4  All  ah  merges  the  night  into  the  day,  and  He  merges  the  day 
into  the  night}  (57:6) 

meaning,  He  extends  the  length  of  one  from  the  other  and  vice 
versa.  Allah  then  continues: 


4jj&  £4  c  4  A 

4 . .  .and  tlte  ships  which  sail  through  the  sea  with  that  which  is 
of  use  to  mankind,} 

Shaping  the  sea  in  this  manner,  so  that  it  is  able  to  carry 


4 . .  .and  the  water  (rain)  which  Allah  sends  down  from  the  sky 
and  makes  the  earth  alive  therewith  after  its  death},  which  is 
similar  to  Allah’s  statement: 


iAnd  a  sign  for  them  is  the  dead  land.  We  give  it  life,  and  We 
bring  forth  from  it  grains,  so  that  they  eat  thereof .}  (36:33), 
until: 


iwhich  they  know  not.}  (36:36) 

Allah  continues: 

4z$*  ^4=  j*  tjj  £j} 

iand  the  moving  (living)  creatures  of  all  kinds  that  He  has 
scattered  therein,} 

meaning,  in  various  shapes,  colors,  uses  and  sizes,  whether 
small  or  large.  Allah  knows  all  that,  sustains  it,  and  nothing  is 
concealed  from  Him.  Similarly,  Allah  said: 


iAnd  no  moving  (living)  creature  is  there  on  earth  but  its 
provision  is  due  from  Allah.  And  He  knows  its  dwelling  place 
and  its  deposit  (in  the  uterus  or  grave) .  All  is  in  a  Clear  Book 
(Al-Lawh  Al-Mahfiiz  —  the  Book  of  Decrees  with  Allah).} 
(11:6) 

4 . .  .and  in  the  veering  of  winds ...  } 

Sometimes,  the  wind  brings  mercy  and  sometimes  torment. 
Sometimes  it  brings  the  good  news  of  the  clouds  that  follow  it, 
sometimes  it  leads  the  clouds,  herding  them,  scattering  them 
or  directing  them.  Sometimes,  the  wind  comes  from  the  north 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174)  (Part-2) 


459 


(the  northern  wind),  and  sometimes  from  the  south,  sometimes 
from  the  east,  and  striking  the  front  of  the  Ka'bah,  sometimes 
from  the  west,  striking  its  back.  There  are  many  books  about 
the  wind  rain,  stars  and  the  regulations  related  to  them,  but 
here  is  not  the  place  to  elaborate  on  that,  and  Allah  knows 
best. 

Allah  continues: 

4... and  clouds  which  are  held  between  the  sky  and  the  earth,  } 

The  clouds  run  between  the  sky  and  the  earth  to  wherever 
Allah  wills  of  lands  and  areas. 

Allah  said  next: 


4 . .  .are  indeed  Ayat  for  people  of  understanding,  } 

meaning,  all  these  things  are  clear  signs  that  testify  to  Allah’s 
Oneness.  Similarly,  Allah  said: 


U&  sh  #  4  £& 

So*-  u  C,  JfjiS  4 


d  .£\\  /fwCL  **  \lL',  \\< 


iVerily,  in  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  in  the 
alternation  of  night  and  day,  there  are  indeed  signs  for  men  of 
understanding.  Those  who  remember  Allah  (always,  and  in 
prayers)  standing,  sitting,  and  lying  down  on  their  sides,  and 
think  deeply  about  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth, 
(saying):  " Our  Lord!  You  have  not  created  (all)  this  without 
purpose,  glory  to  You!  (Exalted  are  You  above  all  that  they 
associate  with  You  as  parhiers).  Give  us  salvation  from  the 
torment  of  the  Fire.”}  (3:190,  191) 


ill  KjLX*  Ltffj  «»'  -  4jii  oj>  ot  J*  u^i. !' 

;W»'  ylUt  ill  Ojji  \£j  f  j 

^  &&  i  ii£S  cr  £  it  i  i^( 


461 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174)  (Part-2) 

anything  or  anyone  with  Him  in  the  worship.  Rather,  they 
worship  Him  Alone,  depend  on  Him  and  they  seek  help  from 
Him  for  each  and  every  need. 

Then,  Allah  warns  those  who  commit  Shirk, 

A  9  v'iif  Z3S*  \  £&  oJ  Jj  &) 

ilf  only ,  those  who  do  wrong  could  see,  when  they  will  see  the 
torment,  that  all  power  belongs  to  Allah. > 

if  these  people  knew  what  they  will  face  and  the  terrible 
punishment  they  are  to  suffer  because  of  their  disbelief  and 
Shirk  (polytheism),  then  they  would  shun  the  deviation  that 
they  live  by. 

Allah  mentions  their  false  beliefs  in  their  idols,  and  that 
those  they  followed  will  declare  their  innocence  of  them.  Allah 
said: 

i\j&  « 'J4  &  ht 

iWhen  those  who  were  followed  disown  (declare  themselves 
innocent  of)  those  wlw  followed  (them).) 

the  angels,  whom  they  used  to  claim  that  they  worshipped, 
declare  their  innocence  of  them  in  the  Hereafter,  saying: 

llUJ  \y\>  U  ^ 


4 We  declare  our  innocence  (from  them)  before  You.  It  was  not 
us  they  worshipped.)  (28:63),  and: 


i"Glorified  be  You!  You  are  our  Walt  (Lord)  instead  of  them. 
Nay,  but  they  used  to  worship  the  Jinn;  most  of  than  were 
believers  in  than.”)  (34:4) 


The  Jinn  will  also  disown  the  disbelievers  who  worshipped 
them,  and  they  will  reject  that  worship.  Allah  said: 

•  T'*  '  •>"  ^  n  vf  .  *  t  >  -i  \  '\ 


iAtid  who  is  more  astray  than  one  who  calls  on  (invokes) 
besides  Allah,  such  as  will  not  answer  him  till  the  Day  of 
Resurrection,  and  who  are  (even)  unaware  of  their  calls 
(invocations)  to  them?  And  what  mankind  are  gathered  (on  the 


462 


Tafsir  [bn  Kathir 

Day  of  Resurrection),  they  (false  deities)  will  become  their 
enemies  and  xvill  deny  their  worshipping. $  (46:5,  6)  Allah 
said: 


pt?6  ^yfeo 


4:*ol? 


4i4«rf  they  have  taken  (for  worship)  dlihah  (gods)  besides  Allah, 
that  they  might  give  them  honor,  power  and  glory  (and  also 
protect  them  from  Allah'  punishment).  Nay,  but  they  (the  so- 
called  gods)  ivill  deny  their  worship  of  them,  and  become 
opponents  to  them  (on  the  Day  of  Resurrection)  >  (19:81,  82) 
Prophet  Ibrahim  said  to  his  people: 


^  LJ-u'  <4  pS-s-?  •■>>•  uy'  oj*  fjt 

4-Ciir^j  dr;  Jill'  Luui  cj 


4Vom  have  taken  (for  worship)  idols  instead  of  Allah.  The  love 
between  you  is  only  in  the  life  of  this  world,  but  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection,  you  shall  disown  each  other,  and  curse  each 
other,  and  your  abode  will  be  the  Fire,  and  you  shall  have  no 
helper. $  (29:25)  Allah  said: 


o;  git  p ry  x-^ 


^4^'  ij,  2 i/  j>jy 
udtt  ouK  jii  ^>\  ^  i 

x  /if  ■{.^ x  /■,{->  V  »/  V* '/  *  /•/  / . i  /{  ^  ^ 

Jlij  i*)  ^  1^-U^iU.I 

/i  &  'jk  ol  U£l-  a  ^  Jit  i:  iz&j  Sij  i^r 

jl  qjjjf  juii  3  JJiVt  Lw>  JjUit  ijl,  D  Ijtoil 


iBut  if  you  could  see  when  the  Zdlimtin  (polytheists  and 
wrongdoers)  ivill  be  made  to  stand  before  their  Lord,  how  they 
will  cast  the  (blaming)  word  one  to  another!  Ihose  who  were 
deemed  weak  will  say  to  those  who  were  arrogant:  "Had  it  not 
been  for  you,  we  should  certainly  luwe  been  believers!"  And 
those  who  were  arrogant  will  say  to  those  who  were  deemed 
weak:  "Did  we  keep  you  back  from  guidance  after  it  had  come 
to  you?  Nay,  but  you  were  Mujrimin  (polytheists,  sinners, 
disbelievers,  criminals)."  Those  who  were  deemed  weak  will  say 


463 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174)  (Part-2) 


to  those  ivho  were  arrogant :  “Nay,  but  it  was  your  plotting  by 
night  and  day,  when  you  ordered  us  to  disbelieve  in  Allah  and 
set  up  rivals  to  Him!''  And  each  of  them  (parties)  will  conceal 
their  own  regrets  (for  disobeying  Allah  during  this  worldly  life), 
when  they  behold  the  torment.  And  We  shall  put  iron  collars 
round  the  necks  of  those  who  disbelieved.  Are  they  requited 
aught  except  what  tltey  used  to  do?}  (34:31-33)  Allah  said: 


U j  -lij  j  ii'  ^  JUj^ 

$  JU&  li  L  ji  ~^L  M  tj 


4And  Shaytdn  (Satan)  will  say  when  the  matter  has  been 
decided:  "Verily,  Allah  promised  you  a  promise  of  truth.  And  I 
too  promised  you,  but  I  betrayed  you.  I  had  no  authority  over 
you  except  that  I  called  you,  and  you  responded  to  me.  So 
blame  me  not,  but  blame  yourselves.  1  cannot  help  you,  nor  can 
you  help  me.  I  deny  your  former  act  in  associating  me  (Satan) 
as  a  partner  with  Allah  (by  obeying  me  in  the  life  of  the  world). 
Verily,  there  is  a  painful  torment  for  the  Zalitnin  (polytheists 
and  wrongdoers) .}  (14:22) 

Allah  then  said: 

jUt 


4 . .  .and  they  see  tlte  torment,  then  all  their  relations  will  be  cut 
off  from  them.} 

meaning,  when  they  see  Allah’s  torment,  their  power  and 
means  of  salvation  are  all  cut  off,  and  they  will  have  no  way  of 
making  amends,  nor  will  they  find  a  way  of  escape  from  the 
Fire.  ‘Ata’  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  about: 

ithen  all  their  relations  will  be  cut  off  from  them.} 

“meaning  the  friendship.”  Mujahid  reported  a  similar 
statement  in  another  narration  by  Ibn  Abu  NajTh.*1* 


m 


At-Tabari  3 :290 . 


464 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathjr 


Allah  said: 


4^i  CS"  Gi  oil  JJ  iyCii  C/jf 


<And  those  who  followed  will  say:  “If  only  we  had  one  more 
chance  to  return  (to  the  worldly  life),  we  would  disown  (declare 
ourselves  as  innocent  from)  them  as  they  have  disowned 
(declared  themselves  as  innocent  from)  us."} 

This  Ayah  means:  ‘If  we  only  had  a  chance  to  go  back  to 
the  life  so  that  we  could  disown  them  (their  idols,  leaders,  etc.) 
shun  their  worship,  ignore  them  and  worship  Allah  Alone 
instead.’  But  they  utter  a  lie  in  this  regard,  because  if  they 
were  given  the  chance  to  go  back,  they  would  only  return  to 
what  they  were  prohibited  from  doing,  just  as  Allah  said.  This 
is  why  Allah  said: 

4^  Jit 

iThus  Allah  will  show  them  their  deeds  as  regrets  for  them.  } 

meaning,  their  works  will  vanish  and  disappear.  Similarly, 
Allah  said: 


iAnd  We  shall  turn  to  whatever  deeds  they  (disbelievers, 
polytheists,  sinners)  did,  and  We  shall  make  such  deeds  as 
scattered  floating  particles  of  dust.}  (25:23) 

Allah  also  said: 


iThe  parable  of  those  who  disbelieved  in  their  Lord  is  that  their 
works  are  as  ashes,  on  which  the  wind  blows  furiously  on  a 
stormy  day.}  (14:18),  and: 


4*t»  oUllilt  illic  i^ka  vftij} 


4As  for  those  who  disbelieved ,  their  deeds  are  like  a  mirage  in  a 
desert.  The  thirsty  one  thinks  it  to  be  water.}  (24:39) 

This  is  why  Allah  said  —  at  the  end  of  the  Ayah  2:167  above 


4And  they  will  never  get  out  of  the  Fire.} 


Smh  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174)  (Part-2) 


465 


jit  ^  7j  tLX  5LU-  ^jSlt  ^  Vi-J  1_)K"  ^ 

7  U  /If  Jt  ijiju  Jj  jiiilij  Cj)  ji'VcN^ 


4 168.  O  mankind!  Eat  of  that  which  is  lawful  and  good  on  the 
earth,  and  follow  not  the  footsteps  of  Shay  tan  (Satan).  Verily, 
he  is  to  you  an  open  enemy 

4169.  He  (Satan)  commands  you  only  what  is  evil  and  Falisha' 
(sinful),  and  that  you  should  say  about  Allah  what  you  know 
not.} 


The  Order  to  eat  the  Lawful  Things,  and  the  Prohibition 
of  following  the  Footsteps  of  Shaytan 


After  Allah  stated  that  there  is  no  deity  worthy  of  worship 
except  Him  and  that  He  Alone  created  the  creation,  He  stated 
that  He  is  the  Sustainer  for  all  His  creation,  and  He  mentioned 
a  favor  that  He  granted  them;  He  has  allowed  them  to  eat  any 
of  the  pure  lawful  things  on  the  earth  that  do  not  cause  harm 
to  the  body  or  the  mind.  He  also  forbade  them  from  following 
the  footsteps  of  Shaytan,  meaning  his  ways  and  methods  with 
which  he  misguides  his  followers,  like  prohibiting  the  Bahurah 
(a  she-camel  whose  milk  was  spared  for  the  idols  and  nobody 
was  allowed  to  milk  it),  or  SaHbah  (a  she-camel  let  loose  for 
free  pasture  for  the  idols  and  nothing  was  allowed  to  be 
carried  on  it),  or  a  Wasilah  (a  she-camel  set  free  for  idols 
because  it  has  given  birth  to  a  she-camel  at  its  first  delivery 
and  then  again  gives  birth  to  a  she-camel  at  its  second 
delivery),  and  all  of  the  other  things  that  Shaytan  made 
attractive  to  them  during  the  time  of  Jdhiliyyah.  Muslim 
recorded  ‘Iyad  bin  Himar  saying  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said 
that  Allah  the  Exalted  says, 


•j  If-  ‘ JUli 


« 'Every  type  of  wealth  I  have  endowed  My  servants  is  allowed 
for  them...’  (until),  7  have  created  My  servants  Hunafd’  (pure 
or  upright),  but  the  devils  came  to  than  and  led  them  astray 
from  their  (true)  religion  and  prohibited  them  from  what  I 


adultery  and  so  forth. 
He  commands  you  to 
commit  what  is  even 
worse,  that  is,  saying 
about  Allah  without 
knowledge.’  So  this 
includes  every 
innovator  and 
disbeliever. 

&  0 1  gi  s  w  & 
a 

lsJ'  j£?  Lp  ji*j 

iToiJ  '&>  ^  (i 

*  £  fi 

4>*sSj§s 

4170.  W7ich  if  is  said  to 
them :  "Follow  what  Al¬ 
lah  has  sent  down." 
They  say:  "Nay!  We 
shall  follow  what  we 
found  our  fathers  following."  (Would  they  do  that!)  even  though  their 
fathers  did  not  understand  anything  nor  were  they  guided ?) 


&0Z  gt&j  IS i 

$  0jjA4 '•> 


*  *1  J~P  ^-P' 

SifiLiji  $  jj)  'pj==>y% 


4172.  And  the  example  of  those  who  disbelieve  is  as  that  of  him  who 
shouts  to  those  (flock  of  sheep)  that  hear  nothing  but  calls  and  cries. 
(They  are)  deaf,  dumb  and  blind.  So  they  do  not  understand .) 


The  Polytheist  imitates  Other  Polytheists 

Allah  states  that  if  the  disbelievers  and  polytheists  are  called 
to  follow  what  Allah  has  revealed  to  His  Messenger  jg  and 
abandon  the  practices  of  misguidance  and  ignorance  that  they 
indulge  in,  they  will  say,  “Rather.  We  shall  follow  what  we 
found  our  fathers  following,”  meaning,  worshipping  the  idols 
and  the  false  deities.  Allah  criticized  their  reasoning: 


468 


Tafsir  /bn  Kathir 


i(Would  they  do  that!)  even  though  their  fathers}, 

meaning,  those  whom  they  follow  and  whose  practices  they 
imitate,  and: 

Yj  Ci  ~i} 

4... did  not  understand  anything  nor  were  they  guided ?} 

meaning,  they  had  no  sound  understanding  or  guidance.  Ibn 
Ishaq  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  this  was  revealed 
about  a  group  of  Jews  whom  Allah’s  Messenger  53  called  to 
Islam,  but  they  refused,  saying,  “Rather,  we  shall  follow  what 
we  found  our  forefathers  following.”  So  Allah  revealed  this  Ayah 
(2:170)  above."1'1 


The  Disbeliever  is  just  like  an  Animal 


Allah  then  made  a  parable  of  the  disbelievers,  just  as  He 
said  in  another  Ayah : 


4 tji!'  *5  ab} 


4For  those  who  believe  not  in  the  Hereafter  is  an  evil 
description.}  (16:60) 

Similarly,  Allah  said  here  (2:171  above) 

$Zj} 


4And  the  example  of  those  who  disbelieve...  } 

meaning,  in  their  injustice,  misguidance  and  ignorance,  they 
are  just  like  wandering  animals,  not  understanding  what  they 
are  told;  if  the  shepherd  heralds  them  or  calls  them  to  what 
benefits  them,  they  would  not  understand  what  is  actually 
being  said  to  them,  for  they  only  hear  unintelligible  sounds. 
This  is  what  is  reported  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah, 
Mujahid,  ‘Ikrimah,  ‘Ata’,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  ‘Ata’  Al- 
Khurasani  and  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas.121 

&?} 

111  At-Jabari  3:305. 

121  Ibn  Abi  HStim  1 :225-228. 


469 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  - 174)  (Part-2) _ 

iThey  are  deaf,  dumb,  and  blind.} 

means,  they  are  deaf,  as  they  do  not  hear  the  truth;  mute,  as 
they  do  not  utter  it;  and  blind,  as  they  do  not  see  or  recognize 
its  path  and  way. 

4S&  * 


4 So  they  do  not  understand .} 

means,  they  do  not  comprehend  or  understand  anything. 

te[  4  k  Ufcifi  6  l£fe 

b}  y*  te  *£>  gtp  Jjc- 


<172.  O  yoi/  who  believe  (in  the  Oneness  of  Allah  -  Islamic 
Monotheism)!  Eat  of  the  lawful  things  that  We  have  provided 
you  with,  and  be  grateful  to  Allah,  if  it  is  indeed  He  Whom 
you  worship }. 

4173.  He  has  Jbrbidden  you  only  the  Maitah  (dead  animals), 
and  blood,  and  the  flesh  of  swine,  and  that  which  is  slaughtered 
as  a  sacrifice  for  other  than  Allah.  But  if  one  is  forced  by 
necessity  without  willful  disobedience  nor  transgressing  due 
limits,  then  there  is  no  sin  on  him.  Truly,  Allah  is  Oft- 
Forgiving,  Most  Merciful .} 


The  Command  to  eat  Pure  Things  and  the  Explanation 
of  the  Prohibited  Things 


Allah  commands  His  believing  servants  to  eat  from  the  pure 
things  that  He  has  created  for  them  and  to  thank  Him  for  it,  if 
they  are  truly  His  servants.  Eating  from  pure  sources  is  a 
cause  for  the  acceptance  of  supplications  and  acts  of  worship, 
just  as  eating  from  impure  sources  prevents  the  acceptance  of 
supplications  and  acts  of  worship,  as  mentioned  in  a  Hadith 
recorded  by  Imam  Ahmad,  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that 
Allah’s  Messenger  jgg  said: 


J»\  Uj  'jA  4)1  jjj  l  ClL>  4)1  jl  1)1  i$;i» 

C*  4l  \pij  j ujf  #£}  :  Jlii 

p  4i&kjj  G  cii  oi  li 


470 


TafoTr  Ibn  Kathir 


U  03  U  :.UJl  Jl  iL:  iJLil  >131  JJJ 

«?Jl3jJ  >Uc1j  >li  Jj-i#- j  ‘f'>*  i-*j  ‘fl>- 


“J  '■'r’j 

,  1 


«0  people!  Allah  is  Tayyib  (Pure  and  Good)  and  only  accepts 
that  which  is  Tayyib.  Allah  has  indeed  commanded  the  believers 
with  what  He  has  commanded  the  Messengers,  for  He  said:  40 
(you)  Messengers!  Eat  of  the  Tayyibdt  and  do  righteous  deeds. 
Verily,  I  am  well-acquainted  with  what  you  do}  (23:51),  and: 
40  you  who  believe!  Eat  of  the  lawful  things  that  We  have 
provided  you  ivith}  He  then  mentioned  a  man,  “iv/io  is 
engaged  in  a  long  journey,  whose  hair  is  untidy  and  who  is 
covered  in  dust,  he  raises  his  hands  to  the  sky,  and  says,  ‘O 
Lord!  O  Lord!’  Yet,  his  food  is  from  the  unlawful,  his  drink  is 
from  the  unlawful,  his  clothes  are  from  the  unlawful,  and  he 
was  nourished  by  the  unlawful,  so  hoiv  can  it  (h is  supplication) 
be  accepted?”^1'  It  was  also  recorded  by  Muslim  and  At- 
Tirmidhi 121 


After  Allah  mentioned  how  He  has  blessed  His  creatures  by 
providing  them  with  provisions,  and  after  commanding  them  to 
eat  from  the  pure  things  that  He  has  provided  them,  He  then 
stated  that  He  has  not  prohibited  anything  for  them,  except 
dead  animals.  Dead  animals  are  those  that  die  before  being 
slaughtered;  whether  they  die  by  strangling,  a  violent  blow,  a 
headlong  fall,  the  goring  of  horns  or  by  being  partly  eaten  by  a 
wild  animal.  Dead  animals  of  the  sea  are  excluded  from  this 
ruling,  as  is  explained  later,  Allah  willing,  as  Allah  said: 


iLawful  to  you  is  (the  pursuit  of)  watergame  and  its  use  for 
food }  (5:96), 

and  because  of  the  Hadith  about  the  whale  recorded  in  the 
SahihP]  The  Musnad,  Al-Muwatta’  and  the  Sunan  recorded 
the  Prophet  saying  about  the  sea: 

jJi j  Jju  5*» 


111  Ahmad  3:328. 

*2'  Muslim  2 :703 ,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8 :333 . 
131  Fath  Al-Bari  6: 152. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174}  ( Part2 ) 


471 


«//s  water  is  pure  and  its  dead  are  permissible .n'1' 

Ash-Shafi'i,  Ahmad,  Ibn  Majah,  and  Ad-Daraqutni  reported 
that  Ibn  “Umar  said  that  the  Prophet  jg  said: 

« juuo  ip'j  ij  cuiiij  01=4;  0  j>.i» 

*We  have  been  allowed  tivo  dead  things  and  two  bloody  things: 
fish  and  locusts;  and  liver  and  spleen* J2' 

We  will  mention  this  subject  again  in  Surat  Al-Ma’idah 
(chapter  5  in  the  Qur’an),  In  sha’  Allah  (if  Allah  wills). 


Issue:  According  to  Ash-Shafi’I  and  other  scholars,  milk  and 
eggs  that  are  inside  dead  unslaughtered  animals  are  not  pure, 
because  they  are  part  of  the  dead  animal.  In  one  narration 
from  him,  Malik  said  that  they  are  pure  themselves,  but 
become  impure  because  of  their  location.  Similarly,  there  is  a 
difference  of  opinion  over  the  cheeses  (made  with  the  milk)  of 
dead  animals.  The  popular  view  of  the  scholars  is  that  it  is 
impure,  although  they  mentioned  the  fact  that  the 
Companions  ate  from  the  cheeses  made  by  the  Magians  (fire 
worshippers).  Hence,  Al-Qurtubi  commented:  “Since  only  a 
small  part  of  the  dead  animal  is  mixed  with  it,  then  it  is 
permissible,  because  a  minute  amount  of  impurity  does  not 
matter  if  it  is  mixed  with  a  large  amount  of  liquid.”13'  Ibn 
Majah  reported  that  Salman  said  that  Allah’s  Messenger 
was  asked  about  butter,  cheese  and  fur.  He  said: 


CJw 


^ U  Jill  J>-i  U 

Up  l La 


*The  allowed  is  what  Allah  has  allowed  in  His  Book  and  the 
prohibited  is  what  Allah  has  prohibited  in  His  Book.  What  He 
has  not  mentioned  is  a  part  of  what  He  has  pardoned  ,b|41 

Allah  has  prohibited  eating  the  meat  of  swine,  whether 

^  Ahmad  5:365,  Al-Muwatta 9  1:22,  Abu  Dawud  1:64,  Tuhfat  Al- 
Ahwadhi  1 :  224,  An-Nasal  1 :50,  and  Ibn  Majah  1 :136. 

121  Tartlb  Musnad  Ash-Shafi'i  2 : 173,  Ahmad  2  :97,  Ibn  Majah  2  : 1073, 
Ad-Daraqutni  4 :272 , 

131  Al-Qurtubi  2:221. 

141  Ibn  Majah  2:1117. 


472 


Tafsir  Fbn  Kathir 

slaughtered  or  not,  and  this  includes  its  fat,  either  because  it 
is  implied,  or  because  the  term  Lahm  includes  that,  or  by 
analogy.  Similarly  prohibited  are  offerings  to  other  than  Allah, 
that  is  what  was  slaughtered  in  a  name  other  than  His,  be  it 
for  monuments,  idols,  divination,  or  the  other  practices  of  the 
time  of  J&hiUyyah.  Al-Qurtubi  mentioned  that  ‘A’ishah  was 
asked  about  what  non-Muslims  slaughter  for  their  feasts  and 
then  offer  some  of  it  as  gifts  for  Muslims.  She  said,  “Do  not 
eat  from  what  has  been  slaughtered  for  that  day,  (or  feast)  but 
eat  from  their  vegetables.”1 11 

The  Prohibited  is  Allowed  in  Cases  of  Emergency 

Then  Allah  permitted  eating  these  things  when  needed  for 
survival  or  when  there  are  no  permissible  types  of  food 
available.  Allah  said: 

'Jj  glj  Jjt 

4Bwf  if  one  is  forced  by  necessity  without  willful  disobedience 
nor  transgressing  due  limits 

meaning,  without  transgression  or  overstepping  the  limits, 

ft 

i...then  there  is  no  sin  on  him.)> 
meaning,  if  one  eats  such  items,  for, 

j ji*  6)^ 

iTruly,  Allah  is  Oft-Forgiving,  Most  Merciful. $ 

Mujahid  said,  “If  one  is  forced  by  necessity  without  willful 
disobedience  nor  transgressing  the  set  limits.  For  example,  if 
he  didn’t,  then  he  would  have  to  resort  to  highway  robbery, 
rising  against  the  rulers,  or  some  other  kinds  of  disobedience 
to  Allah,  then  the  permission  applies  to  him.  If  one  does  so 
transgressing  the  limits,  or  continually,  or  out  of  disobedience 
to  Allah,  then  the  permission  does  not  apply  to  him  even  if  he 
is  in  dire  need.”  The  same  was  reported  from  Said  bin  Jubayr. 
Said  and  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  are  reported  to  have  said  that 
without  willful  disobedience  means,  “Without  believing  that  it 


111  Al-Qurtubi  2:224. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (150  -  174 )  (Pqrt=21 _ 473 

is  permissible.  ”|11  It  was  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented 
on  the  Ayah: 


i ..  .without  willful  disobedience  nor  transgressing ^ 

saying,  “Without  willful  disobedience  means  eating  the  dead 
animal  and  not  continuing  to  do  so.  Qatadah  said: 


4 without  willful  disobedience}  “Without  transgressing  by  eating 
from  the  dead  animals,  that  is  when  the  lawful  is  available.  ”*2) 
Issue:  When  one  in  dire  straits  finds  both  —  dead  animals, 
and  foods  belong  to  other  people  which  he  could  get  without 
risking  the  loss  of  his  hands  or  causing  harm,  then  it  is  not 
allowed  for  him  to  eat  the  dead  animals.  Ibn  Majah  reported 
that  ‘Abbad  bin  Shurahbil  Al-Ghubari  said,  “One  year  we 
suffered  from  famine.  I  came  to  Al-Madlnah  and  entered  a 
garden.  I  took  some  grain  that  I  cleaned,  and  ate,  then  I  left 
some  of  it  in  my  garment.  The  owner  of  the  garden  came, 
roughed  me  up  and  took  possession  of  my  garment.  I  then 
went  to  Allah’s  Messenger  Jfe;  and  told  him  what  had  happened. 
He  said  to  the  man: 


4\  v  >'j&  il  ^  ij  -  O.L.  j\  -  i) 

-  •  '  •  *  .  *{  i  •  . .  , 

UJUA.  j\  fUis  <0  t  Ajjj 


“Yom  have  not  fed  him  when  he  was  hungry  -  or  he  said 
starving  -  nor  have  you  taught  him  if  he  was  ignorant. » 

The  Prophet  jg  commanded  him  to  return  ‘Abbad ’s  garment 
to  him,  and  to  offer  him  a  Wasq  (around  180  kilograms)  -  or  a 
half  Wasq  -  of  food*3' 

This  has  a  sufficiently  strong  chain  of  narrators  and  there 
are  many  other  witnessing  narrations  to  support  it,  such  as 
the  Hadith  that  ‘Amr  bin  Shu'ayb  narrated  from  his  father 
that  his  grandfather  said:  Allah’s  Messenger  ^  was  asked 
about  the  hanging  clusters  of  dates.  He  said: 


***  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :236. 
121  At-Tabari  3 :324 . 

131  Ibn  MSjah  2:770. 


474 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Ip  *^^4  i£I>-  (_ji  OL*»f 


iThere  is  no  harm  for  whoever  takes  some  of  it  in  his  mouth  for 
a  necessity  without  putting  it  in  his  garment  .s'1' 

Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  commented  on: 

iL&>  5J*  '*i'  o)  &  'f>\ 


4 . . .then  there  is  no  sin  on  him.  Truly,  Allah  is  Oft-Forgiving, 
Most  Merciful .} 

“For  what  is  eaten  out  of  necessity."*2*  Said  bin  Jubayr  said, 
“Allah  is  pardoning  for  what  has  been  eaten  of  the  unlawful, 
and  Merciful’  in  that  He  allowed  the  prohibited  during  times  of 
necessity.”*3*  MasrQq  said,  “Whoever  is  in  dire  need,  but  does 
not  eat  or  drink  until  he  dies,  he  will  enter  the  Fire.”*4’  This 
indicates  that  eating  dead  animals  for  those  who  are  in  need 
of  it  for  survived  is  not  only  permissible  but  required. 


U  iiijl  ui  (1  .*J  d>jjS)  ^=ii*  CH  '*»'  ^ 

£\jZ  fJi  >4^=4  ^ J  4 

;w|  jdit  #  \&JX  1$ 

4 "'V\ 4  ij.l'l?  £jjji  jjj  ^JL  v_4^=»3'  Jj-j  i>tj  *iU'i 


4174.  Verily,  those  who  conceal  what  Allah  has  sent  down  of 
the  Book,  and  purchase  a  small  gain  therewith  (of  worldly 
things),  they  eat  into  their  bellies  nothing  but  fire.  Alldlt  will 
not  speak  to  them  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection,  nor  purify  them, 
and  theirs  will  be  a  painful  torment}. 

4175.  Those  are  they  who  have  purchased  error  at  the  price  of 
guidance,  and  torment  at  the  price  of  forgiveness .  So  how  bold 
they  are  (for  evil  deeds  ivhich  will  push  them)  to  the  Fire}. 

$176.  That  is  because  Allah  has  sent  down  the  Book  (the 
Qur'an)  in  truth.  And  verily,  those  who  disputed  as  regards 
the  Book  are  far  away  in  opposition}. 


***  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  4 :510 . 

*2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :240. 

*3*  Ibn  Abi  flatim  1 :240 . 

*4*  Al-Bayhaqi  in  AsSunan  Al-Kubra  9 :357 . 


475 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200}  (Part-2) 

Criticizing  the  Jews  for  concealing  what  Allah  revealed 

Allah  said: 


iVerily,  those  who  conceal  what  Allah  has  setit  down  of  the 
Book.} 


Meaning  the  Jews  who  concealed  their  Book’s  descriptions  of 
Muhammad  jg,  all  of  which  testify  to  his  truth  as  a  Messenger 
and  a  Prophet.  They  concealed  this  information  so  that  they 
would  not  lose  authority  and  the  position  that  they  had  with 
the  Arabs,  where  they  would  bring  them  gifts,  and  honor  them. 
The  cursed  Jews  feared  that  if  they  announced  what  they  know 
about  Muhammad  sg,  then  the  people  would  abandon  them 
and  follow  him.  So  they  hid  the  truth  so  that  they  may  retain 
the  little  that  they  were  getting,  and  they  sold  their  souls  for 
this  little  profit.  They  preferred  the  little  that  they  gained  over 
guidance  and  following  the  truth,  believing  in  the  Messenger  jg 
and  having  faith  in  what  Allah  was  sent  him  with.  Therefore, 
they  have  profited  failure  and  loss  in  this  life  and  the  Hereafter. 

As  for  this  world,  Allah  made  the  truth  about  His  Messenger 
jg  known  anyway,  by  the  clear  signs  and  the  unequivocal 
proofs.  Thereafter,  those  whom  the  Jews  feared  would  follow 
the  Prophet  sg,  believed  in  him  and  followed  him  anyway,  and 
so  they  became  his  supporters  against  them.  Thus,  the  Jews 
earned  anger  on  top  of  the  wrath  that  they  already  had  earned 
before,  and  Allah  criticized  them  again  many  times  in  His  Book. 
For  instance,  Allah  said  in  this  Ayah  (2:174  above): 


tjc  j*  ill  Vi 


iVerily,  those  who  conceal  what  Allah  has  sent  down  of  the 
Book,  and  purchase  a  small  gain  therewith  (of  worldly  things).} 

meaning,  the  joys  and  delights  of  this  earthly  life.  Allah  said: 

x;  if#  4  t: 


i ■  ■  they  eat  into  their  bellies  nothing  but  fire.}  meaning, 
whatever  they  eat  in  return  for  hiding  the  truth,  will  turn 
into  a  raging  fire  in  their  stomachs  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection. 


Similarly,  Allah  said: 


477 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 


sins  they  have 
committed.  Allah  then 
said: 

ipti  £  \Z} 

iSo  how  bold  they  are 
(for  evil  deeds  which 
will  push  them)  to  the 
Fire.} 

Allah  states  that 
they  will  suffer  such 
severe,  painful 
torment  that  those 
who  see  them  will  be 
amazed  at  how  they 
could  bear  the 
tremendous 
punishment,  torture 
and  pain  that  they 
will  suffer.  We  seek 
refuge  with  Allah 
from  this  evil  end. 

Allah’s  Statement: 

S * 


TV  SE 


\  '"W  "'*t'  -  ^  *  M  *-  'u<Jk  '  *  i 

i-U-1  <u>jj  ou'i 


35*£i  ©  £$ar jpU£t 

:  f  Ax  r.  ' 


iThat  is  because  Allah  has  sent  down  the  Book  (the  Qur'an)  in 
truth.} 

means,  they  deserve  this  painful  torment  because  Allah  has 
revealed  Books  to  His  Messenger  Muhammad  jg|,  and  the 
Prophets  before  him,  and  these  revelations  bring  about  truth 
and  expose  falsehood.  Yet,  they  took  Allah’s  signs  for  mockery. 
Their  Books  ordered  them  to  announce  the  truth  and  to  spread 
the  knowledge,  but  instead,  they  defied  the  knowledge  and 
rejected  it.  This  Final  Messenger  —  Muhammad  —  called 
them  to  Allah,  commanded  them  to  work  righteousness  and 
forbade  them  from  committing  evil.  Yet,  they  rejected,  denied 
and  defied  him  and  hid  the  truth  that  they  knew  about  him. 
They,  thus,  mocked  the  Ay  at  that  Allah  revealed  to  His 


478 


TafsTr  Ibn  Katlnr 


Messengers,  and  this  is  why  they  deserved  the  torment  and  the 
punishment.  This  is  why  Allah  said  here  (2:176): 


^  ^  'jiki-l  igjh  Jj— *  All!  ifj 


iThat  is  because  Allah  has  sent  down  the  Book  (the  Qur'an)  in 
truth.  And  verily,  tlwse  who  disputed  about  the  Book  are  far 
away  in  opposition.} 


yjf'J  jil.  Oi  jf  l$J  J-i  |^»JW  '.Ay  o"'  jJ* 

Jf)  O^llll'j  l£ji  ‘Ci-  ff.  J0'f  Jl.j  0^'j  S^=*jl.)lj 

lil  iijJl  a'ij  jj  0^1'j 

^  1^.  OjiJI  d  Ij 


4377.  It  is  not  Birr  that  you  turn  your  faces  towards  east  and 
(or)  west;  but  Birr  is  the  one  who  believes  in  Allah,  the  Last 
Day,  the  Angels,  the  Book,  the  Prophets  and  gives  his  ivealth, 
in  spite  of  love  for  it,  to  the  kinsfolk,  to  the  orphans,  and  to  Al- 
Masdkin  (the  poor),  and  to  the  wayfarer,  and  to  those  who  ask, 
and  to  set  servants  free,  performs  As-Saldh  (Iqdmat-As-Saldh) , 
and  gives  the  Zakdh,  and  who  fulfill  their  covenant  when  they 
make  it,  and  zvho  are  patient  in  extreme  poverty  and  ailment 
(disease)  and  at  the  time  of  fighting  (during  the  battles).  Such 
are  the  people  of  the  truth  and  they  are  Al-Muttaqun  (the 
pious).} 


Al-Birr  (Piety,  Righteousness) 

This  Ayah  contains  many  great  wisdoms,  encompassing 
rulings  and  correct  beliefs. 

As  for  the  explanation  of  this  Ayah,  Allah  first  commanded 
the  believers  to  face  Bayt  Al-Maqdis,  and  then  to  face  the 
Ka'bah  during  the  prayer.  This  change  was  difficult  for  some 
of  the  People  of  the  Book,  and  even  for  some  Muslims.  Then 
Allah  sent  revelation  which  clarified  the  wisdom  behind  this 
command,  that  is,  obedience  to  Allah,  adhering  to  His 
commands,  facing  wherever  He  commands  facing,  and 
implementing  whatever  He  legislates,  that  is  the  objective. 
This  is  Birr,  Taqwa  and  complete  faith.  Facing  the  east  or  the 
west  does  not  necessitate  righteousness  or  obedience,  unless  it 
is  legislated  by  Allah.  This  is  why  Allah  said: 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 


479 


P'J  &  &  Z  $  ?Pl  Xi  $y  J  !$  & 


</(  is  not  Birr  that  you  turn  your  faces  towards  east  and  (or) 
west  (in  prayers);  but  Birr  is  the  one  who  believes  in  Allah  and 
the  Last  Day,} 


Similarly,  Allah  said  about  the  sacrifices: 

iC  lS&  %  l^L  #  jC  j} 


ilt  is  neither  their  meat  nor  their  blood  that  reaches  Allah,  but 
it  is  the  piety  from  you  that  reaches  Him.}  (22:37) 

Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  said,  “The  Jews  used  to  face  the  west  for  their 
Qiblah,  while  the  Christians  used  to  face  the  east  for  their 
Qiblah.  So  Allah  said: 


4-fp'j  •jp1'  Jr*  pJTJ  O'  jf  p} 


4lt  is  not  Birr  that  you  turn  your  faces  toioards  east  and  (or) 
west  (in  prayers)}  (2:177) 

meaning,  “this  is  faith,  and  its  essence  requires 
implementation.”  Similar  was  reported  from  Al-Hasan  and  Ar- 
Rabf  bin  AnasJ1'  Ath-Thawri  recited: 


4.&S.  j,  jot  '$%} 

ibut  Birr  is  the  one  who  believes  in  Allah,} 

and  said  that  what  follows  are  the  types  of  Birr.12’  He  has  said 
the  truth.  Certainly,  those  who  acquire  the  qualities  mentioned 
in  the  Ayah  will  have  indeed  embraced  all  aspects  of  Islam 
and  implemented  all  types  of  righteousness;  believing  in  Allah, 
that  He  is  the  only  God  worthy  of  worship,  and  believing  in 
the  angels  the  emissaries  between  Allah  and  His  Messengers. 

The  “Books’  are  the  Divinely  revealed  Books  from  Allah  to  the 
Prophets,  which  were  finalized  by  the  most  honorable  Book 
(the  Qur’an).  The  Qur’an  supercedes  all  previous  Books,  it 
mentions  all  types  of  righteousness,  and  the  way  to  happiness 
in  this  life  and  the  Hereafter.  The  Qur’an  abrogates  all 
previous  Books  and  testfies  to  all  of  Allah’s  Prophets,  from  the 
first  Prophet  to  the  Final  Prophet,  Muhammad,  may  Allah’s 


l1'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :251 . 
121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :253 . 


480 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlnr 


peace  and  blessings  be  upon  them  all. 
Allah’s  statement: 


&j} 


4... and  gives  his  wealth,  in  spite  of  love  for  it,} 


refers  to  those  who  give  money  away  while  desiring  it  and 
loving  it.  It  is  recorded  in  the  Sahthayn  that  Abu  Hurayrah 
narrated  that  the  Prophet  jg  said: 


i^iill  I  ^r>y~a  ijj-Zu  jl  jii> ■/»!' 


uThe  best  charity  is  when  you  give  it  away  while  still  healthy 
and  thrifty,  hoping  to  get  rich  and  fearing  poverty,  n1*1 

Allah  said: 


%  'ijr  fL.  %’j  ^it  *j.j!  0\  if  '  L}Jj 


they  give  food,  inspite  of  their  love  for  it,  to  the  Miskiti 
(the  poor),  the  orphan,  and  the  captive  (saying) :  "We  feed  you 
seeking  Allah's  Face  only.  We  wish  for  no  reward,  nor  thanks 
from  you."}  (76:8,  9) 


and: 


4By  no  means  shall  you  attain  Birr  unless  you  spend  of  that 
which  you  love.}  (3:92)  Allah’s  statement: 


4 . .  .and  give  them  preference  over  themselves  even  though  they 
were  in  need  of  that}  (59:9) 

refers  to  a  higher  category  and  status,  as  the  people 
mentioned  here  give  away  what  they  need,  while  those 
mentioned  in  the  previous  Ayat  give  away  what  they  covet  (but 
not  necessarily  need). 

Allah’s  statement: 


ithe  kinsfolk}  refers  to  man’s  relatives,  who  have  more  rights 


111  FathAl-Bari  3:334,  and  Muslim  2:716. 


481 


Stirah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200}  (Part-2) 


than  anyone  else  to  one’s  charity,  as  the  Hadith  supports: 

«ilsU»i.p  iJ>.)  ii,  ^01 


«Sadaqah  (i.e.,  charity)  given  to  the  poor  is  a  charity,  while  the 
Sadaqah  given  to  the  relatives  is  both  Sadaqah  and  Silah 
(nurturing  relations),  for  they  are  the  most  deserving  of  you 
and  your  kindness  and  charity* Sl* 

Allah  has  commanded  kindness  to  the  relatives  in  many 
places  in  the  Qur’an. 


4 to  the  orphans}  The  orphans  are  children  who  have  none  to 
look  after  them,  having  lost  their  fathers  while  they  are  still 
young,  weak  and  unable  to  find  their  own  sustenance  since 
they  have  not  reached  the  age  of  work  and  adolescence.  ‘Abdur- 
Razzaq  reported  that  ‘Ali  said  that  the  Prophet  jg  said: 


iand  to  Al-Masdkin}  The  Miskin  is  the  person  who  does  not  have 
enough  food,  clothing,  or  he  has  no  dwelling.  So  the  Miskin 
should  be  granted  the  provisions  to  sustain  him  enough  so  that 
he  can  acquire  his  needs.  In  the  SahUiayn  it  is  recorded  that 
Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  Allah’s  Messenger  ssg  said: 


i  tjl'.a  tflllj  a o $ Ji  ^JJl  ol^laJl  j  5s. *  Jl 

yisx 4  3  v'3  ^ 


*The  Miskin  is  not  the  person  who  roams  around,  and  whose 
need  is  met  by  one  or  two  dates  or  one  or  two  bites.  Rather,  the 
Miskin  is  he  who  does  not  have  what  is  sufficient,  and  to  whom 
the  people  do  not  pay  attention  and,  thus,  do  not  give  him  from 

the  charity 


4and  to  the  wayfarer}  is  the  needy  traveler  who  runs  out  of 
money  and  should,  thus,  be  granted  whatever  amount  that 


111  Ahmad  4:214. 

Fath  Al-B&ri  3 :399 ,  and  Muslim  2:719. 


482 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

helps  him  to  go  back  to  his  land.  Such  is  the  case  with  whoever 
intends  to  go  on  a  permissible  journey,  he  is  given  what  he 
needs  for  his  journey  and  back.  The  guests  are  included  in  this 
category.  ‘Ali  bin  Abu  Talhah  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 
“ Ibn  As-Sabil  (wayfarer)  is  the  guest  who  is  hosted  by 
Muslims.”111  Furthermore,  Mujahid,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Abu 
JaTar  Al-Baqir,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Ad-Dahhak,  Az-Zuhri,  Ar- 
Rabi'  bin  Anas  and  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  said  similarly 

iand  to  those  who  ask}  refers  to  those  who  beg  people  and  Eire 
thus  given  a  part  of  the  Zakah  and  general  charity. 

i'r'P 

iand  to  set  servants  free} 

These  are  the  servants  who  seek  to  free  themselves,  but 
cannot  find  enough  money  to  buy  their  freedom.  We  will 
mention  several  of  these  categories  and  types  under  the  Tafsir 
of  the  Ayah  on  Sadaqah  in  Surat  Bara’ah  (chapter  9  in  the 
Qur’an),  In  sha’  Allah. 

Allah’s  statement: 

iperforms  As-Saldh  ( Iqdmat-As-Saldh )}  means  those  who  pray  on 
time  and  give  the  prayer  its  due  right;  the  bowing,  prostration, 
and  the  necessary  attention  and  humbleness  required  by  Allah. 
Allah’s  statement: 

iand  gives  the  Zakah }  means  the  required  charity  {Zakah)  due 
on  one’s  money,  as  Said  bin  Jubayr  and  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan 
have  stated.131 
Allah’s  statement: 

iand  who  fulfill  their  covenant  when  they  make  it,} 

111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :259. 

I2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :260. 

I3*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :264 . 


483 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) _ 

is  similar  to: 

\  jfj  4tt«  jpjjl  y5 

iThose  zoho  fulfill  the  covenant  of  Allah  and  break  not  the 
Mithciq  (bond,  treaty,  covenant).}  (13:20) 

The  opposite  of  this  characteristic  is  hypocrisy.  As  found  in  a 
Hadith : 

®  bjj  t i  IS) j  bj  :  l  Ajh 

'‘The  signs  of  a  hypocrite  are  three:  if  he  speaks,  he  lies;  if  he 
promises,  he  breaks  his  promise;  and  if  he  is  etitrusted,  he 
breaches  the  trust. 

In  another  version: 

IS)3  IS!® 

“If  he  speaks,  he  lies;  if  he  vows,  he  breaks  his  voio;  and  if  he 
disputes,  he  is  lewd.d 21 
Allah’s  statement: 

jUAii  ^  ^ 

i...and  who  are  patient  in  extreme  poverty  and  ailment 
(disease)  and  at  the  time  of  fighting  (during  the  battles).} 

means,  during  the  time  of  meekness  and  ailment. 

3*3} 

}...and  at  the  time  of  fighting  (during  the  battles).} 

means  on  the  battlefield  while  facing  the  enemy,  as  Ibn 
Mas'ud,  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Murrah  Al-Hamdani, 
Mujahid,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin 
Anas,  As-Suddi,  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan,  Abu  Malik, [3'  Ad- 
Dahhak  and  others  have  stated.141 

And  calling  them  the  patient  here,  is  a  form  ;f  praise, 
because  of  the  importance  of  patience  in  these  circumstances, 
and  the  suffering  and  difficulties  that  accompany  them.  And 

Muslim  1 :78. 

121  Ibid. 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :270-271 . 

141  At-Tabari  3:355. 


484 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

Allah  knows  best,  it  is  He  Whom  help  is  sought  from,  and 
upon  Him  we  rely. 

Allah’s  statement: 


iSuch  are  the  people  of  the  truth 4 

means,  whoever  acquires  these  qualities,  these  are  truthful  in 
their  faith.  This  is  because  they  have  achieved  faith  in  the 
heart  and  realized  it  in  deed  and  upon  the  tongue.  So  they  are 
the  truthful, 


iatid  they  are  Al-Muttaqun  (the  pious). $ 

because  they  avoided  the  prohibitions  and  performed  the  acts 
of  obedience. 


^  p  jlli;  4  ip: 

j  j£jj  ,'vX'  jLji  viitjLe.  JiS  dlj’j  jJJ  iXci 


4^0 fed 


4178.  O  you  who  believe!  Al-Qisas  (the  Law  of  equality)  is 
prescribed  for  you  in  case  of  murder:  the  free  for  the  free,  the 
slave  for  the  slave,  and  the  finale  fr  the  finale.  But  if  the 
killer  is  frgiven  by  the  brother  (or  the  relatives)  of  the  killed 
(against  blood  money),  then  it  should  be  sought  in  a  good 
manner,  and  paid  to  him  respectfully.  This  is  an  alleviation  and 
a  mercy  fom  your  Lord.  So  after  this,  whoever  transgresses  the 
limits  (i.e.  kills  the  killer  after  taking  the  blood  money),  he  shall 
have  a  painful  torment. $ 

4179.  And  there  is  (a  saving  of)  lif  fr  you  in  Al-Qisas  (the 
Law  of  equality  in  punishment),  O  men  of  understanding,  that 
you  may  acquire  Taqwd .4 


The  Command  and  the  Wisdom  behind  the  Law  of 
Equality 

Allah  states:  O  believers!  The  Law  of  equality  has  been 
ordained  on  you  (for  cases  of  murder),  the  free  for  the  free,  the 
slave  for  the  slave  and  the  female  for  the  female.  Therefore,  do 


485 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200}  (Part-2) 


not  transgress  the  set  limits,  as  others  before  you  transgressed 
them,  and  thus  changed  what  Allah  has  ordained  for  them. 
The  reason  behind  this  statement  is  that  (the  Jewish  tribe  of) 
Banu  An-Nadlr  invaded  Qurayzah  (another  Jewish  tribe) 
during  the  time  of  Jahiliyyah  (before  Islam)  and  defeated  them. 
Hence,  (they  made  it  a  law  that)  when  a  person  from  Nadir 
kills  a  person  from  Quraizah,  he  is  not  killed  in  retaliation, 
but  only  pays  a  hundred  IVasg*1'  of  dates.  However,  when  a 
person  from  Quraizah  kills  a  Nadir  man,  he  would  be  killed  for 
him.  If  Nadir  wanted  (to  forfeit  the  execution  of  the  murderer 
and  instead  require  him)  to  pay  a  ransom,  the  Quraizah  man 
pays  two  hundred  Wasq  of  dates  (double  the  amount  Nadir 
pays  in  Diyah  (blood  money)].  So  Allah  commanded  that 
justice  be  observed  regarding  the  penal  code,  and  that  the 
path  of  the  misguided  and  mischievous  persons  be  avoided, 
who  in  disbelief  and  transgression,  defy  and  alter  what  Allah 
has  commanded  them.  Allah  said: 


jif  4 


4Al-Qisas  (the  Law  of  equality  in  punishment)  is  prescribed  for 
you  in  case  of  murder:  the  free  for  the  free,  the  slave  for  the 
slave,  and  the  female  for  the  female .} 

Allah’s  statement: 


m  a  » 


4 the  free  for  the  free,  the  slave  for  the  slave,  and  the  female  for 
the  female.} 

was  abrogated  by  the  statement  {life  for  life)  (5:45).  However, 
the  majority  of  scholars  agree  that  the  Muslim  is  not  killed  for 
a  disbeliever  whom  he  kills.  Al-  Bukhari  reported  that  ‘Ali 
narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  sg  said: 

jii; 

*The  Muslim  is  not  killed  for  the  disbeliever  (whom  he 
kills). o'2’ 

No  opinion  that  opposes  this  ruling  could  stand  correct,  nor 
is  there  an  authentic  Hadith  to  contradict  it.  However,  Abu 

I1*  A  camel  load,  sixty  Sa‘,  approximately  165  liters. 

I2'  Sahlh  A  l-Bukh&ri  no .  111. 


486 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

Hanifah  thought  that  the  Muslim  could  be  killed  for  a 
disbeliever,  following  the  general  meaning  of  the  Ayah  (5:45)  in 
Surat  Al-Ma’idah  (chapter  5  in  the  Qur’an). 

The  Four  Imams  (Abu  Hanifah,  Malik,  Shafil  and  Ahmad) 
and  the  majority  of  scholars  stated  that  the  group  is  killed  for 
one  person  whom  they  murder.  'Umar  said,  about  a  boy  who 
was  killed  by  seven  men,  “If  all  the  residents  of  San ‘a’  (capital 
of  Yemen  today)  collaborated  on  killing  him,  I  would  kill  them 
all.”  No  opposing  opinion  was  known  by  the  Companions 
during  that  time  which  constitutes  a  near  Ijma‘  (consensus). 
There  is  an  opinion  attributed  to  Imam  Ahmad  that  a  group  of 
people  is  not  killed  for  one  person  whom  they  kill,  and  that 
only  one  person  is  killed  for  one  person.  Ibn  Al-Mundhir  also 
attributed  this  opinion  to  Mu'adh,  Ibn  Az-Zubayr,  ‘Abdul-Malik 
bin  Marwan,  Az-Zuhri,  Ibn  Sirin  and  Habib  bin  Abu  Thabit. 
Allah’s  statement: 


iBut  if  the  killer  is  forgiven  by  the  brother  (or  the  relatives)  of 
the  killed  (against  blood  money),  then  it  should  be  sought  in  a 
good  manner,  and  paid  to  him  respectfully  > 

refers  to  accepting  blood  money  (by  the  relatives  of  the  victim 
in  return  for  pardoning  the  killer)  in  cases  of  intentional 
murder.  This  opinion  is  attributed  to  Abu  Al-'Aliyah,  Abu 
Sha'tha’,  Mujahid,  Sa'Id  bin  Jubayr,  ‘Ata’  Al-Hasan,111 
Qatadah12’  and  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan.131  Ad-Dahhak  said  that 
Ibn  ‘Abbas  said: 


i  *£  ^ 

iBut  if  the  killer  is  forgiven  by  the  brother  (or  the  relatives)  of 
the  killed  (against  blood  money fo 

means  the  killer  is  pardoned  by  his  brother  (i.e.,  the  relative  of 
the  victim)  and  accepting  the  Diyah  after  capital  punishment 
becomes  due  (against  the  killer),  this  is  the  ‘Afw  (pardon 
mentioned  in  the  Ayah ).”*41  Allah’s  statement: 


111  Ibn  Abi  flatim  i :  278-279. 
121  At-Tabari  3  :368. 

,31  IbnAbiHatim  1:279. 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :280 . 


487 


Sitrah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2j 


4... then  it  should  be  sought  in  a  good  manner ,} 
means,  when  the  relative  agrees  to  take  the  blood  money,  he 
should  collect  his  rightful  dues  with  kindness: 


A 


i  and  paid  to  him  respectfully  .} 

means,  the  killer  should  accept  the  terms  of  settlement 
without  causing  further  harm  or  resisting  the  payment. 

Allah’s  statement: 


iThis  is  an  alleviation  and  a  mercy  from  your  Lord .} 

means  the  legislation  that  allows  you  to  accept  the  blood 
money  for  intentional  murder  is  an  alleviation  and  a  mercy 
from  your  Lord.  It  lightens  what  was  required  from  those  who 
were  before  you,  either  applying  capital  punishment  or 


forgiving.  M_, 

Sa'id  bin  Mansur  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  The 
Children  of  Israel  were  required  to  apply  the  Law  of  equality  in 
murder  cases  and  were  not  allowed  to  offer  pardons  (in  return 
for  blood  money).  Allah  said  to  this  Ummah  (the  Muslim 


nation): 


%%  &  135  #  P  fcK  i  &&  ^ 


iThe  Law  of  equality  in  punishment  is  prescribed  for  you  in 
case  of  murder  :  the  free  for  the  free,  the  servant  for  Die  servant, 
and  the  female  for  the  female.  But  if  the  killer  is  forgiven  by  the 
brother  (or  the  relatives)  of  the  killed  (against  blood  money),} 
Hence,  ‘pardoning’  or  ‘forgiving’  means  accepting  blood 
money  in  intentional  murder  cases.”111  Ibn  Hibban  also 
recorded  this  in  his  SahihP]  Qatadah  said: 

oi  4^ 


W  Sunan  Sa‘id  bin  Mansur  2  :652 . 
121  Ibn  Hibban  7 :601 . 


488 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

iThis  is  an  alleviation  from  your  Lord} 

Allah  had  mercy  on  this  Ummah  by  giving  them  the  Diyah 
which  was  not  allowed  for  any  nation  before  it.  The  People  of 
the  Torah  (Jews)  were  allowed  to  either  apply  the  penal  code 
(for  murder,  i.e.,  execution)  or  to  pardon  the  killer,  but  they 
were  not  allowed  to  take  blood  money.  The  People  of  the  Injll 
(the  Gospel  -  the  Christians)  were  required  to  pardon  (the 
killer,  but  no  Diyah  was  legislated).  This  Ummah  (Muslims)  is 
allowed  to  apply  the  penal  code  (execution)  or  to  pardon  and 
accept  the  blood  money.”  Similar  was  reported  from  Said  bin 
Jubayr,  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  and  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas.*1' 

Allah’s  statement: 

iSo  after  this  whoever  transgresses  the  limits,  he  shall  have  a 
painful  torment .} 

means,  those  who  kill  in  retaliation  after  taking  the  Diyah  or 
accepting  it,  they  will  suffer  a  painful  and  severe  torment  from 
Allah.  The  same  was  reported  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Mujahid,  ‘Ata’ 
Iknmah,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas,  As-Suddi  and 
Muqatil  bin  Hayyan.*2! 

The  Benefits  and  Wisdom  of  the  Law  of  Equality 

Allah’s  statement: 


4 And  there  is  lift  for  you  in  Al-Qisas} 

legislating  the  Law  of  equality,  i.e.,  killing  the  murderer, 
carries  great  benefits  for  you.  This  way,  the  sanctity  of  life  will 
be  preserved  because  the  killer  will  refrain  from  killing,  as  he 
will  be  certain  that  if  he  kills,  he  would  be  killed.  Hence  life 
will  be  preserved.  In  previous  Books,  there  is  a  statement  that 
killing  stops  further  killing!  This  meaning  came  in  much 
clearer  and  eloquent  terms  in  the  Qur’an: 

ujtSqif  4  pj} 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :274-275. 
,2)  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :278-279. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  ( 175  -  200)  (Part-2) 


Jr 


mm 


YA 


mm 


*k  *r 


Ji 


*  X  " 

'4  fZ  x  *•  *'  4 

0  cfoS 

U^l^jAK _ $JLfi>o^ J 

✓  ^  *  Ad*  ✓  /f  ^ <  E  <x£  •/  **>■  ^ 

^i!  1  p£-~*  *x. uL3yu  y  c5 «A  ^  *  02  ^r*w*ir£J 
0^oJL_*3 ^1  ^alU 
j^ssu 

4^Jj  ^  1J  \  \ 

t*.//  /  (  "*  + '  'ms  1  *4^  -£  ' .  f  */  .  ✓ 

jlc J 1  JJ  \  V^  J  S-^s'  v?->— 3  <3  Li  (J^  t£  *V— *£ 

^ (*4^ caLv-^-L) 4 If;  aR 


_ 489 

iAnd  there  is  (a  saving 
of)  life  for  you  in  Al- 
Qisas  (the  Law  of  equal¬ 
ity  in  punishment)  .$> 
Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  said, 
“Allah  made  the  Law 
of  equality  a  ‘life’. 
Hence,  how  many  a 
man  who  thought 
about  killing,  but  this 
Law  prevented  him 
from  killing  for  fear 
that  he  will  be  killed 
in  turn.”  Similar 
statements  were 
reported  from 
Mujahid,  Sa'id  bin 
Jubayr,  Abu  Malik, 
Al-Hasan,  Qatadah, 
Ar-Rabi‘  bin  Anas 
and  Muqatil  bin 
Hayyan.*11  Allah’s 
statement: 

vj4V(  4 


iO  men  of  understanding,  that  you  may  acquire  Taqwa.$ 

means,  ‘O  you  who  have  sound  minds,  comprehension  and 
understanding!  Perhaps  by  this  you  will  be  compelled  to 
refrain  from  transgressing  the  prohibitions  of  Allah  and  what 
He  considers  sinful.’  Taqwa  (mentioned  in  the  Ayah)  is  a  word 
that  means  doing  all  acts  of  obedience  and  refraining  from  all 
prohibitions. 


C?j>V'j  +~jff  tjji.  jij  ^  ojji  ' jj 

ill  Oj  4*  Uiji  fjj?  'ijj?  (Jjj  o-j  Je  Ui  t. 

&  &  fy&'ji {*■<£,  Csj  $  LS£  y  os  3L  <2  y 


***  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :290-292. 


490 


4180.  It  is  prescribed  for  you,  when  death  approaches  any  of 
you,  if  he  leaves  wealth,  that  he  makes  a  bequest  to  parents  and 
next  of  kin,  according  to  reasonable  manners.  (This  is)  a  duty 
upon  Al-Muttaqin  (the  pious).) 

4181 .  Then  whoever  changes  it  after  hearing  it,  the  sin  shall  be 
on  those  who  make  the  change.  Truly,  Allah  is  All-Hearer,  All- 
Knower.) 

4182.  But  he  who  fears  from  a  testator  some  unjust  act  or 
wrongdoing,  and  thereupon  he  makes  peace  between  the  parties 
concerned,  there  shall  be  no  sin  on  him.  Certainly,  Allah  is 
Oft-Forgivitig,  Most  Mercifid.) 


Including  Parents  and  Relatives  in  the  Will  was  later 
abrogated 

This  Ayah  contains  the  command  to  include  parents  and 
relatives  in  the  will,  which  was  obligatory,  according  to  the 
most  correct  view,  before  the  Ayah  about  inheritance  was 
revealed.  When  the  Ayah  of  inheritance  was  revealed,  this 
Ayah  was  abrogated,  so  fixed  shares  of  the  inheritance  for 
deserving  recipients  were  legislated  by  Allah.  Therefore, 
deserving  inheritors  take  their  fixed  inheritance  without  the 
need  to  be  included  in  the  will  or  to  be  reminded  of  the  favor 
of  the  inherited  person.  For  this  reason  we  see  the  Hadith 
narrated  in  the  Sunan  and  other  books  that  ‘Amr  bin  Kharijah 
said:  I  heard  Allah’s  Messenger  ss  saying  in  a  speech: 

3  Su  j»-  (£?  js  ji  liit  oj» 

t Allah  has  given  each  heir  his  fixed  share.  So  there  is  no  will 
for  a  deserving  /ieir.81’1 

Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Muhammad  bin  Sirin  said:  Ibn 
‘Abbas  recited  Surat  Al-Baqarah  (chapter  2  in  the  Qur’an)  until 
he  reached  the  Ayah: 

^  Tuhf dt  Al-Ahwadhi  6 :3 13 ,  An-Nasa’i  6:247,  and  Ibn  Majah  2:905. 


491 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 

4...  if  he  leaves  wealth,  that  he  makes  a  bequest  to  parents  and 
next  of  kin.} 

He  then  said,  “This  Ayah  was  abrogated.”  This  was  recorded 
by  Said  bin  Mansur  and  Al-Hakim  in  his  Mustadrak* 1 1  Al- 
Hakim  Said,  “It  is  Sahih  according  to  their  criteria  (Al-Bukhari 
and  Muslim)”.  Ibn  Abu  Hatim  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said 
that  Allah’s  statement: 


4a  bequest  to  parents  and  next  of  kin} 
was  abrogated  by  the  Ayah : 

ji  t U  ilj  dl  c>/4$  4'j  d:  Z+J,  yZ‘0 

4  dwi’j  jf 


4There  is  a  share  for  men  and  a  share  for  women  from  what  is 
left  by  parents  and  those  nearest  related,  whether  the  property 
be  small  or  large  -  a  legal  share.}  (4:7) 

Ibn  Abu  Hatim  then  said,  “It  was  reported  from  Ibn  Umar, 
Abu  Mdsa,  Said  bin  Musayyib,  Al-Hasan,  Mujahid,  ‘Ata’  Said 
bin  Jubayr,  Muhammad  bin  Sirin,121  ‘Ikrimah,131  Zayd  bin 
Aslam  and  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas.  Qatadah,  As-Suddi,  Muqatil  bin 
Hayyan,14*  TawQs,*5'  Ibrahim  An-Nakha‘I,  Shurayh,  Ad- 
Dahhak  and  Az-Zuhri  said  that  this  Ayah  (2:180  above)  was 
abrogated  by  the  Ayah  about  the  inheritors  (4:7).”161 


The  Will  for  the  Relatives  that  do  not  qualify  as 
Inheritors 

It  is  recommended  that  the  remaining  relatives  who  do  not 
have  a  designated  fixed  share  of  the  inheritance,  be  willed  up 
to  a  third,  due  to  the  general  meaning  of  the  Ayah  about  the 
will.  It  is  recorded  in  the  §ahxhayn  that  Ibn  Umar  said  that 
Allah’s  Messenger  M  said: 

111  Said  bin  MansOr  2 :663 ,  and  Al-Hakim  2 :273 . 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hdtim  1 :30 1-302. 

131  At-Tabari  3 :391 . 

*4*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :302-303 . 

151  At-Tabari  3:389. 

161  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1:303. 


492 


Tafsir  ton  Kathir 


n,<»«  9  if'  **  sT,  *'#1M  *  '  •  >  ^  y.  i  .  f  i .  4  #  .  ^ 

.  «»xp  <— ?j_>  Ml  ,j3J  aj  *J  {*4-— ^  »i£ >•'  J>-  L*® 


«It  is  not  permissible  for  any  Muslim  who  has  something  to 
will  to  stay  for  two  nights  witfwut  having  his  last  will  and 
testament  written  and  kept  ready  with  him.» 


Ibn  “Umar  commented,  “Ever  since  I  heard  this  statement 
from  Allah’s  Messenger  jg,  no  night  has  passed,  but  my  will  is 
kept  ready  with  me.’’11  There  are  many  other  Aycit  and  Ahadith 
ordering  kindness  and  generosity  to  one’s  relatives. 


The  Will  should  observe  Justice 

The  will  should  be  fair,  in  that  one  designates  a  part  of  the 
inheritance  to  his  relatives  without  committing  injustice 
against  his  qualified  inheritors  and  without  extravagance  or 
stinginess.  It  is  recorded  in  the  Sahihaynl2]  that  Sa‘d  bin  Abu 
Waqqas  said,  “O  Allah’s  Messenger!  I  have  some  money  and 
only  a  daughter  inherits  from  me,  should  1  will  all  my 
remaining  property  (to  others)?”  He  said,  “No.”  Sa‘d  said, 
“Then  may  I  will  half  of  it?”  He  said,  “No.”  Sa‘d  said,  “One- 
third?”  He  said,  “Yes,  one-third,  yet  even  one-third  is  too 
much.  It  is  better  for  you  to  leave  your  inheritors  wealthy  than 
to  leave  them  poor,  begging  from  others.”  Al-Bukhari 
mentioned  in  his  Sahih  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “I  recommend 
that  people  reduce  the  proportion  of  what  they  bequeath  by 
will  to  a  fourth  (of  the  whole  legacy)  rather  than  a  third,  for 
Allah’s  Messenger  %  said: 

>  >3 


uOne-third,  yet  even  one-third  is  too  much . » ”|31 
Allah’s  statement: 


4  Then  whoever  changes  it  after  hearing  it,  the  sin  shall  be  on 
those  who  make  the  change.  Truly,  Allah  is  All-Hearer,  All- 
Knower .> 


111  Fath  Al-B&ri  5 :419 ,  and  Muslim  3 : 1249  and  1250 . 
Fath  Al-Bari  5 :724 ,  and  Muslim  3 : 1250. 

Sahih  Al-Bukhdri  no.  2743 . 


493 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 

means,  whoever  changed  the  will  and  testament  or  altered  it 
by  addition  or  deletion,  including  hiding  the  will  as  is  obvious, 
then 

4  £ 

4 the  sin  shall  be  on  those  who  make  the  change.} 

Ibn  ‘Abbas  and  others  said,  “The  dead  person’s  reward  will 
be  preserved  for  him  by  Allah,  while  the  sin  is  acquired  by 
those  who  change  the  will.”*1* 

y  is 

iTruly,  Allah  is  All-Hearer,  All-Knoiver .} 

means,  Allah  knows  what  the  dead  person  has  bequeathed 
and  what  the  beneficiaries  (or  others)  have  changed  in  the  will. 

Allah’s  statement: 

4C5'  $  cjt  ^ 

4But  he  who  fears  from  a  testator  some  unjust  act  or 
wrongdoing,} 

Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Mujahid,  Ad-Dahhak,  Ar-Rabi‘ 
bin  Anas  and  As-Suddi  said,  “Error.”*2*  These  errors  include 
such  cases  as  when  the  inheritor  indirectly  acquires  more 
than  his  fair  share,  such  as  by  being  allocated  that  a  certain 
item  mentioned  in  the  legacy  be  sold  to  him.  Or,  the  testator 
might  include  his  daughter’s  son  in  the  legacy  to  increase  his 
daughter’s  share  in  the  inheritance,  and  so  forth.  Such  errors 
might  occur  out  of  the  kindness  of  the  heart  without  thinking 
about  the  consequences  of  these  actions,  or  by  sinful 
intention.  In  such  cases,  the  executive  of  the  will  and 
testament  is  allowed  to  correct  the  errors  and  to  replace  the 
unjust  items  in  the  will  with  a  better  solution,  so  that  both  the 
Islamic  law  and  what  the  dead  person  had  wished  for  are 
respected  and  observed.  This  act  would  not  constitute  an 
alteration  in  the  will  and  this  is  why  Allah  mentioned  it 
specifically,  so  that  it  is  excluded  from  the  prohibition  (that 
prohibits  altering  the  will  and  testament)  mentioned  in  the 

11  *  At-Tabari  3:397. 

*2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :3 10-31 1 . 


494 


Tafsfr  I bn  Kathy: 


previous  Ayah.  And  Allah  knows  best. 


The  Virtue  of  Fairness  in  the  Will 


‘Abdur-Razzaq  reported  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  Allah’s 
Messenger  jg  said: 

‘ vj?  >-iU-  I  jil  a)0 

J*'  j4-pi  !>p  . jilh  ^  J  jUiJi 


“A  w<j»  might  perform  the  works  of  righteous  people  for 
seventy  years,  but  when  he  dictates  his  will,  he  commits 
injustice  and  thus  his  ivorks  end  with  the  worst  of  his  deeds  and 
he  enters  the  Fire.  A  man  might  perform  the  works  of  evil 
people  for  seventy  years,  but  then  dictates  a  just  will  and  thus 
ends  with  the  best  of  his  deeds  and  then  enters  Paradise .» 

Abu  Hurayrah  then  said,  “Read  if  you  wish: 

yi  fo  ijii- 


4These  are  the  limits  ordained  by  Allah,  so  do  not  transgress 
them.yW  (2:229) 


fij  **  &JS  <S  fO»  ;U^£  Lk  \p:  -,J\  tfkfo 

d*J  P  A-^  (j*  ju*  jii  IpA  pi.  C/A 

f  >  > it  /*<  +<*'£  '<  r  ^ ^  -*?  ■£  t  >  / 

L*4 u»j  i/*3  yuy-k»  -w  •  yjJl 


4183.  O  you  who  believe!  Fasting  is  prescribed  for  you  as  it 
was  prescribed  for  those  before  you,  that  you  may  acquire 
Taqwa.4 

4184.  Fast  for  a  fixed  number  of  days,  but  if  any  of  you  is  ill 
or  on  a  journey,  the  same  number  (should  be  made  up)  from 
other  days.  And  as  for  those  who  can  fast  with  difficulty,  (e.g., 
an  old  man),  they  have  (a  choice  either  to  fast  or)  to  feed  a 
Miskin  (poor  person)  (for  every  day).  But  whoever  does  good  of 
his  own  accord,  it  is  better  for  him .  And  that  you  fast  is  better 


111  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  9:88. 


Surah  2.  AFBagargh  (175  -  200)  (Pm±2) 
for  you  if  only  you  know.} 


495 


The  Order  to  Fast 


In  an  address  to  the  believers  of  this  Ummah,  Allah  ordered 
them  to  fast,  that  is,  to  abstain  from  food,  drink  and  sexual 
activity  with  the  intention  of  doing  so  sincerely  for  Allah  the 
Exalted  alone.  This  is  because  fasting  purifies  the  souls  and 
cleanses  them  from  the  evil  that  might  mix  with  them  and 
their  ill  behavior.  Allah  mentioned  that  He  has  ordained 
fasting  for  Muslims  just  as  He  ordained  it  for  those  before 
them,  they  being  an  example  for  them  in  that,  so  they  should 
vigorously  perform  this  obligation  more  obediently  than  the 
previous  nations.  Similarly,  Allah  said: 


Z  4  pj  2,1  iit  rtl  %  u££  j 

/t  y./-  v  »>  £  * 


4To  each  among  you,  We  have  prescribed  a  law  and  a  clear 
way.  If  Allah  had  willed,  He  would  have  made  you  one  nation, 
but  that  (He)  may  test  you  in  what  He  has  given  you;  so 
compete  in  good  deeds.}  (5:48) 

Allah  said  in  this  Ayah : 


fij  c*  $  cr  fof  Jf  ip:  z,J\  i '4k} 


4  Vi.: 


40  you  who  believe!  Fasting  is  prescribed  for  you  as  it  was 
prescribed  for  those  before  you,  that  you  may  have  Taqwd).} 

since  the  fast  cleanses  the  body  and  narrows  the  paths  of 
Shaytan.  In  the  Sahthayn  the  following  Hadith  was  recorded: 


U» 


«0  young  people!  Whoever  amongst  you  can  afford  marriage, 
let  him  marry.  Whoever  cannot  afford  it,  let  him  fast,  for  it  will 
be  a  shield  for  /»>«.»* 11 

Allah  then  states  that  the  fast  occurs  during  a  fixed  number 
of  days,  so  that  it  does  not  become  hard  on  the  hearts. 


* 1  *  Fath  Al-B&ri  9 :8 ,  and  Muslim  2:1018. 


496 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathir 
thereby  weakening  their  resolve  and  endurance.® 

The  various  Stages  of  Fasting 

Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim  recorded  that  ‘A’ishah  said,  “(The 
day  of)  ‘Ashura’  was  a  day  of  fasting.  When  the  obligation  to 
fast  Ramadan  was  revealed,  those  who  wished  fasted,  and 
those  who  wished  did  not.”*1*  Al-Bukhari  recorded  the  same 
from  Ibn  TJmar  and  Ibn  Mas'ud.*2* 

Allah  said: 

4.. . those  who  can  fast  with  difficulty,  (e.g.,  an  old  man),  they 
have  (a  choice  either  to  fast  or)  to  feed  a  Miskfn  (poor  persott) 

(for  every  day).} 

Mu'adh  commented,  “In  the  beginning,  those  who  wished, 
fasted  and  those  who  wished,  did  not  fast  and  fed  a  poor 
person  for  each  day.”  Al-  Bukhari  recorded  Salamah  bin  Al- 
Akwa‘  saying  that  when  the  Ayah : 

4  ij-ii  COjll  Jzj} 

4.. .tlwse  who  can  fast  with  difficulty,  (e.g.,  an  old  man),  they 
have  (a  choice  either  to  fast  or)  to  feed  a  Miskin  (poor  person) 
(for  every  day).} 

was  revealed,  those  who  did  not  wish  to  fast,  used  to  pay  the 
Fidyah  (feeding  a  poor  person  for  each  day  they  did  not  fast) 
until  the  following  Ayah  (2:185)  was  revealed  abrogating  the 
previous  Ayah)3 ’  It  was  also  reported  from  TJbaydullah  from 
Nafi'  that  Ibn  ‘Umar  said;  “It  was  abrogated.”  *4*  As-Suddi 
reported  that  Murrah  narrated  that  ‘Abdullah  said  about  this 
Ayah: 

ithose  who  can  fast  with  difficulty,  (e.g.,  an  old  man),  they 
have  (a  choice  either  to  fast  or)  to  feed  a  Misktn  (poor  person) 

111  Fath  Al-Bari  8  :  26  and  Muslim  2  :792 . 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  8:26. 

*3*  Fath  Al-Bari  8:29. 

(4>  Ibid. 


497 


Surah  2.  AI-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 

{for  every  day).} 

“It  means  “those  who  find  it  difficult  (to  fast).’  Formerly,  those 
who  wished,  fasted  and  those  who  wished,  did  not  but  fed  a 
poor  person  instead.”*11  Allah  then  said: 

iBut  whoever  does  good  of  his  own  accord} 
meaning  whoever  fed  an  extra  poor  person, 

X  -A*  o' j  fJ 

iit  is  better  for  him.  And  that  you  fast  is  better  for  you} 

Later  the  Ayah : 

^ — ..i.U  jf. ji  '~r*J ^ 

}So  whoever  of  you  sights  (the  crescent  on  the  first  night  of)  the 
month  (of  Ramadan,  i.e.,  is  present  at  his  home),  he  must 
observe  Saivm  (fasting)  that  month}  (2:185) 

was  revealed  and  this  abrogated  the  previous  Ayah  (2:184). 


The  Fidyah  (Expiation)  for  breaking  the  Fast  is  for  the 
Old  and  the  Ailing 

Al-Bukhari  reported  that  ‘Ata  heard  Ibn  ‘Abbas  recite: 

pL  hSi  &} 

4  And  as  for  those  zoho  can  fast  with  difficulty,  (e.g.,  an  old 
man),  they  have  (a  choice  either  to  fast  or)  to  feed  a  Miskin 
(poor  person)  (for  every  day).} 

Ibn  ‘Abbas  then  commented,  “(This  Ayah)  was  not  abrogated, 
it  is  for  the  old  man  and  the  old  woman  who  are  able  to  fast 
with  difficulty,  but  choose  instead  to  feed  a  poor  person  for 
every  day  (they  do  not  fast).”*2*  Others  reported  that  Said  bin 
Jubayr  mentioned  this  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas.  So  the  abrogation 
here  applies  to  the  healthy  person,  who  is  not  traveling  and 
who  has  to  fast,  as  Allah  said: 

jfcs  ^  i f^} 


111  FathAl-Bari  8:28. 
121  FathAl-Bari  8:28. 


498 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

4So  whoever  of  you  sights  (the  crescent  on  the  first  night  of)  the 
month  (of  Ramadan,  i.e.,  is  present  at  his  home),  he  tnust 
observe  Sawm  (fasting)  that  month .}  (2:185) 

As  for  the  old  man  (and  woman)  who  cannot  fast,  he  is 
allowed  to  abstain  from  fasting  and  does  not  have  to  fast 
another  day  instead,  because  he  is  not  likely  to  improve  and 
be  able  to  fast  other  days.  So  he  is  required  to  pay  a  Fidyah 
for  every  day  missed.  This  is  the  opinion  of  Ibn  ‘Abbas  and 
several  others  among  the  Salaf  who  read  the  Ayah: 


iAnd  as  for  those  who  can  fast  with  difficulty,  (e.g.,  an  old 
man)} 

to  mean  those  who  find  it  difficult  to  fast1  '•  as  Ibn  Mas*ud 
stated.  This  is  also  the  opinion  of  Al-Bukhari  who  said,  “As  for 
the  old  man  (person)  who  cannot  fast,  (he  should  do  like)  Anas 
who,  for  one  or  two  years  after  he  became  old  fed  some  bread 
and  meat  to  a  poor  person  for  each  day  he  did  not  fast.”*21 
This  point,  which  Al-Bukhari  attributed  to  Anas  without  a 
chain  of  narrators,  was  collected  with  a  continuous  chain  of 
narrators  by  Abu  Yala  Mawsuli  in  his  Musnad,  that  Ayyub  bin 
Abu  Tamimah  said;  “Anas  could  no  longer  fast.  So  he  made  a 
plate  of  Tharid  (broth,  bread  and  meat)  and  invited  thirty  poor 
persons  and  fed  them.”*3*  The  same  ruling  applies  for  the 
pregnant  and  breast-feeding  women  if  they  fear  for  themselves 
or  their  children  or  fetuses.  In  this  case,  they  pay  the  Fidyah 
and  do  not  have  to  fast  other  days  in  place  of  the  days  that 
they  missed. 


aii 

ii  J |1  cAj  J-y"  o-J 

U  ^  &  i_4Uj;  ;5Ji  ijLUi;  ^  L.J,  %  fa  iii  i 

fax. 


4185.  The  month  of  Ramadan  in  which  was  revealed  the 
Qur'an,  a  guidance  for  mankind  and  clear  proof  for  the 


111  At-Tabari  3:431 . 

*2'  Fath  Al-Bari  8 : 1 79 . 

*3*  Musnad  Abu  Ya'la  7:204. 


499 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 

guidance  and  the  criterion  (between  right  and  ivrong).  So 
whoever  of  you  sights  (the  crescent  on  the  first  night  of)  the 
month  (of  Ramadan,  i. e.,  is  present  at  his  home),  he  must 
observe  Sawm  (fasting)  that  month,  and  whoever  is  ill  or  on  a 
journey,  the  same  number  [of  days  which  one  did  not  observe 
Sawm  (fasting)  must  be  made  up}  from  other  days.  Allah 
intends  for  you  ease,  and  He  does  not  want  to  make  things 
difficult  for  you.  (He  wants  that  you)  must  complete  the  same 
number  (of  days),  and  that  you  must  magnify  Allah  [i.e.,  to 
say  Takbir  (Alldhu  Akbar:  Allah  is  the  Most  Great)]  for  having 
guided  you  so  that  you  may  be  grateful  to  Him  > 


The  Virtue  of  Ramadan  and  the  Revelation  of  the  Qur’an 
in  it. 


Allah  praised  the  month  of  Ramadan  out  of  the  other 
months  by  choosing  it  to  send  down  the  Glorious  Qur’an,  just 
as  He  did  for  all  of  the  Divine  Books  He  revealed  to  the 
Prophets.  Imam  Ahmad  reported  Wathilah  bin  Al-Asqa‘  that 
Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said: 


jjt  '-~A  oJyij  i  j ill!  Jji  oJjjl* 

lil  ijtJt ‘J  wi>-  j.-lp  ijL OJ>J 

•jGoaj  oi>- 


«The  Suhuf  (Pages)  of  Ibrahim  were  revealed  during  the  first 
night  of  Ramadan.  The  Torah  was  revealed  during  the  sixth 
night  of  Ramadan.  The  Injil  ivas  revealed  during  the  thirteaith 
night  of  Ramadan.  Allah  revealed  the  Qur'an  on  the  tiventy- 
fourth  night  of  Ramadan 


The  Virtues  of  the  Qur’an 

Allah  said: 


4... a  guidance  for  mankind  and  clear  proofs  for  the  guidance 
and  the  criterion  (between  right  and  wrong).} 

Here  Allah  praised  the  Qur’an,  which  He  revealed  as 


Ahmad  4:107. 


501 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  Allah  allowed  such  persons,  out  of 
His  mercy  and  to  make  matters  easy  for  them,  to  break  the 
fast  when  they  are  ill  or  traveling,  while  the  fast  is  still 
obligatory  on  the  healthy  persons  who  are  not  traveling. 


Several  Rulings  concerning  the  Fast 

The  authentic  Sunnah  states  that  Allah’s  Messenger  m 
traveled  during  the  month  of  Ramadan  for  the  battle  for 
Makkah.  The  Prophet  ig  marched  until  he  reached  the  area  of 
Kadld  and  then  broke  his  fast  and  ordered  those  who  were  with 
him  to  do  likewise.  This  was  recorded  in  the  Two  SahOxs J11 
Breaking  the  fast  mentioned  in  this  Hadith  was  not  required, 
for  the  Companions  used  to  go  out  with  Allah’s  Messenger 
during  the  month  of  Ramadan,  then,  some  of  them  would  fast 
while  some  of  them  would  not  fast  and  neither  category  would 
criticize  the  others.  If  the  command  mentioned  in  the  Hadith 
required  breaking  the  fast,  the  Prophet  would  have  criticized 
those  who  fasted.  Allah’s  Messenger  §3  himself  sometimes 
fasted  while  traveling.  For  instance,  it  is  reported  in  the  Two 
Sahihs  that  Abu  Ad-Darda’  said,  “We  once  went  with  Allah’s 
Messenger  sg  during  Ramadan  while  the  heat  was  intense.  One 
of  us  would  place  his  hand  on  his  head  because  of  the  intense 
heat.  Only  Allah’s  Messenger  ^  and  ‘Abdullah  bin  Rawahah 
were  fasting  at  that  time.”*21 

We  should  state  that  observing  the  permission  to  break  the 
fast  while  traveling  is  better,  as  Allah’s  Messenger  said 
about  fasting  while  traveling: 

^ LJ?  Ij* 3  1  fas\  & 


uThose  who  did  not  fast  have  done  good,  and  there  is  no  harm 
for  those  who  fasted  V3’ 

In  another  Hadith,  the  Prophet  said: 

iHold  to  Allah's  pertnission  that  He  has  granted  yoH.»|41 


111  Fath  Al-Bari  3 :213,  Muslim  2 :784. 

Fath  Al-Bari  4 :2 1 5 ,  and  Muslim  2 :790 . 
*3'  Muslim  2 :790 . 

141  Muslim  2:786. 


502 


Tgjsir  Ibn  Kathir 

Some  scholars  say  that  the  two  actions  are  the  same,  as 
‘A’ishah  narrated  that  Hamzah  bin  ‘Amr  Al-Aslami  said,  “O 
Messenger  of  Allah!  I  fast  a  lot,  should  I  fast  while  traveling?” 
The  Prophet  said: 

iJLi  jp  ijUiu  oJLj  ji» 

11  Fast  if  you  wish  or  do  not  fast  if  you  wish .» 

This  Hadith  is  in  the  Two  SahihsV *  It  was  reported  that  if 
the  fast  becomes  difficult  (while  traveling),  then  breaking  the 
fast  is  better.  Jabir  said  that  Allah’s  Messenger  sg  saw  a  man 
who  was  being  shaded  (by  other  people  while  traveling).  The 
Prophet  sg  asked  about  him  and  he  was  told  that  man  was 
fasting.  The  Prophet  sg  said: 

Ht  is  not  a  part  of  Birr  (piety)  to  fast  ivhite  traveling . » 

This  was  recorded  by  Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim.'21 

As  for  those  who  ignore  the  Sunnah  and  believe  in  their 
hearts  that  breaking  the  fast  while  traveling  is  disliked,  they 
are  required  to  break  the  fast  and  are  not  allowed  to  fast. 

As  for  making  up  for  missed  fasting  days,  it  is  not  required 
to  be  consecutive.  One  may  do  so  consecutively  or  not 
consecutively.  There  are  ample  proofs  to  this  fact.  We  should 
mention  that  fasting  consecutive  days  is  only  required 
exclusively  during  Ramadan.  After  the  month  of  Ramadan, 
what  is  required  then  is  to  merely  make  up  for  missed  days. 
This  is  why  Allah  said: 

4 j*-'  fe}  ja 

i...the  same  number  (sltould  be  made  up)  from  other  days > 

Ease  and  not  Hardship 

Allah  then  said: 

-i-riJt  ^  Sit  Xjjff 

AAUah  intends  for  you  ease,  and  He  does  not  want  to  make 
things  difficult  for  you  .> 


Fath  Al-Bari  4 :21 1 ,  and  Muslim  2 :789 . 
121  Fath  Al-Bari  4 :2 16,  and  Muslim  2 :786. 


503 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 


Imam  Ahmad  recorded  Anas  bin  Malik  saying  that  Allah’s 
Messenger  £jjj;  said: 


•J  'Jj-i" 


"Treat  the  people  with  ease  and  don't  be  hard  on  them;  give 
them  glad  tidings  and  don't  fill  them  with  aversion .» 

This  Hadith  was  also  collected  in  the  Two  SahihsV^  It  is 
reported  in  the  Sahihayn  that  Allah’s  Messenger  said  to 
Mu’adh  and  Abu  Musa  when  he  sent  them  to  Yemen: 


•UliiJ  Y J  li- J lioj J  fc  I fi-mj  Yj  4  Y J 


“Treat  f/ie  people  with  ease  and  don't  be  hard  on  them;  give 
them  glad  tidings  and  don’t  fill  them  with  aversion;  and  love 
each  other,  and  don't  differ  .»121 

The  Sunan  and  the  Musnad  compilers  recorded  that  Allah’s 
Messenger  said: 

“/  was  sent  with  the  easy  Hanifiyyah  (Islamic  Monotheism).^ 
Allah’s  statement: 


iAUah  intends  for  you  ease,  and  He  does  not  want  to  make 
things  difficult  for  you .  (He  wants  that  you)  must  complete  the 
same  number  (of  days)} 

means:  You  were  allowed  to  break  the  fast  while  ill,  while 
traveling,  and  so  forth,  because  Allah  wanted  to  make  matters 
easy  for  you.  He  only  commanded  you  to  make  up  for  missed 
days  so  that  you  complete  the  days  of  one  month. 


Remembering  Allah  upon  performing  the  Acts  of 
Worship 

Allah’s  statement: 

111  Ahmad  3 : 13 1 ,  and  209 ,  Fath  Al-Bari  10 :54 1 ,  and  Muslim  3 : 1359 . 
121  Fath  Al-Bari  7 :660 ,  Muslim  3 : 1 587 . 

131  Ahmad  5:266. 


504 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


4  ■  ■  -and  that  you  must  magnify  Allah  [i.e.,  to  say  Takbir 
(Alldltu  Akbar:  Allah  is  the  Most  Great)]  for  having  guided  you £ 

means:  So  that  you  remember  Allah  upon  finishing  the  act  of 
worship.  This  is  similar  to  Allah’s  statement: 


iU-i  £  l^iS  ££} 


4So  when  you  have  accomplished  your  Mandsik,  (rituals) 
remember  Allah  as  you  remember  your  forefathers  or  with  far 
more  remembrance .}  (2:200)  and: 


yr  &  \ffo%  &  Jjs  \fojj  j  f# 

4 


4... Then  when  the  (Jumu'ah)  Saldh  (prayer)  is  ended,  you  may 
disperse  through  the  land,  and  seek  the  bounty  of  Allah  (by 
working),  and  remember  Allah  much,  that  you  may  be 
successful .}  (62:10)  and: 


'jA'j  J  $  j»j  yfjfoH  Jjj  Jj  cij  ali  (f^j} 


4-. -and  glorify  the  praises  of  your  Lord,  before  the  rising  of  the 
sun  and  before  (its)  setting.  And  during  a  part  of  the  night, 
glorify  His  praises,  and  after  the  prayers.}  (50:39,  40) 

This  is  why  the  Sunnah  encouraged  Tasbih  (saying  Subhan 
Allah,  i.e.,  all  praise  is  due  to  Allah),  Tahmid  (saying  Al-Hamdu 
Lillah,  i.e.,  all  the  thanks  are  due  to  Allah)  and  Takbir  (saying 
Alla.hu  Akbar,  i.e.,  Allah  is  the  Most  Great)  after  the 
compulsoiy  prayers.  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “We  used  to  know  that 
Allah’s  Messenger  jfe  has  finished  the  prayer  by  the  Takbir •.”01 
Similarly,  several  scholars  have  stated  that  reciting  Takbir  the 
during  ‘Id-ul-Fitr  was  specified  by  the  Ayah  that  states: 


4(He  wants  that  you)  must  complete  the  same  number  (of 
days),  and  that  you  must  magnify  Allah  [i.e.,  to  say  Takbir 
(Alldhu  Akbar:  Allah  is  the  Most  Great)]  for  having  guided 
you...} 


m 


Sahih  Al’Bukhari  no .  842 . 


505 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqaralt  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 
Allah’s  statement: 


4... so  that  you  may  be  grateful  to  Him.} 

means.  If  you  adhere  to  what  Allah  commanded  you,  obeying 
Him  by  performing  the  obligations,  abandoning  the 
prohibitions  and  abiding  by  the  set  limits,  then  perhaps  you 
will  be  among  the  grateful. 


4  j/r  Ji  \\  gjjill 


4186.  And  when  My  servants  ask  you  (O  Muhammad  jg 
concerning  Me,  then  anszver  them),  I  am  indeed  near  (to  them 
by  My  knowledge).  I  respond  to  the  invocations  of  the 
supplicant  when  he  calls  on  Me  (without  any  mediator  or 
intercessor).  So  let  them  obey  Me  and  believe  in  Me,  so  that 
they  may  be  led  aright .} 


Allah  hears  the  Servant’s  Supplication 


Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  Abu  Mftsa  Al-Ash‘ari  said,  “We 
were  in  the  company  of  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  during  a  battle. 
Whenever  we  climbed  a  high  place,  went  up  a  hill  or  went  down 
a  valley,  we  used  to  say,  ‘Allah  is  the  Most  Great,’  raising  our 
voices.  The  Prophet  jg  came  by  us  and  said: 


lJj  4&U  ij  'oy-x  i  ijjLiii  Ji  Ijijl  ^JQ\  L'l 
^  J\  y j*'  byX  ^JJl  jj  ULw  jyx 

Jy  V  jjk  J  las’  ijdUf  Vi  J  4>\jy 


«0  people!  Be  merciful  to  yourselves  (i.e.,  don't  raise  your 
voices),  for  you  are  not  calling  a  deaf  or  an  absent  one,  but  One 
Who  is  All-Hearer,  All-Seer.  The  One  Whom  you  call  is  closer 
to  one  of  you  than  the  neck  of  his  animal.  O  'Abdullah  bin  Qais 
(Abu  Musa  s  name)  should  I  teach  you  a  statement  that  is  a 
treasure  of  Paradise :  ‘La  hawla  wa  la  quwwata  ilia  billdh  (there 
is  no  power  or  strength  except  from  Allah): 'm  » 


m 


Ahmad  4  :402 . 


507 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 


Imam  Malik  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  narrated  that 
Allah’s  Messenger  said: 

: 0j}j  jlJU 


“One's  supplication  will  be  accepted  as  long  as  he  does  become 
get  hasty  and  say,  7  have  supplicated  but  it  has  not  been 
accepted  from  me."^ 


This  Hadith  is  recorded  in  the  Two  Sahihs)2]  from  Malik,  and 
this  is  the  wording  of  Al-Bukhari. 

Muslim  recorded  that  the  Prophet  jg  said: 


U  :  JS  P  U  r-3  jf  &  jJ'  U  4^  J'>:  7. 

j'  ^ii  >0^5  aij  ji  :Jli  Uj 

y 1}  Jjji  xp  4  J  4,u^j 


«The  supplication  of  the  servant  will  be  accepted  as  long  as  he 
does  not  supplicate  for  what  includes  sin,  or  cutting  the 
relations  of  the  womb,  and  as  long  as  he  does  not  become 
hasty. »  He  was  asked,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah!  How  does 
one  become  hasty?”  He  said,  «He  says,  7  supplicated  and 
supplicated,  but  I  do  not  see  that  my  supplication  is  being 
accepted  from  me.'  He  thus  looses  interest  and  abandons 
supplicating  (to  Allah)  .W 


Three  Persons  Whose  Supplication  will  not  be  rejected 

In  the  Musnad  of  Imam  Ahmad  and  the  Sunans  of  At- 
Tirmidhi,  An-Nasal  and  Ibn  Majah  it  is  recorded  that  Abu 
Hurayrah  narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said: 


•  ,  (  .. 


cbUJl  :  *p-pj** 

fji  j  j}  <1)1 


« Three  persons  will  not  have  their  supplication  rejected:  the  just  rider , 
the  fasting  person  until  breaking  the  fast ,  and  the  supplication  of  the 
oppressed  person ,  for  Allah  raises  it  above  the  clouds  on  the  Day  of 

111  Ahmad  2:396. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  1 1 : 145,  and  Muslim  4  :2095 . 

^  Muslim  4 :2096. 


508 


J  ™  ssssp 


K 


%p 


P$Z$-\£%  {j&p&C^£g$ 
1^2ti$&2£dA&$&d$3L 

65v^i 

^Jjjill-i  ^  jv*^  J^>»^ 

p3-M 

S3  ^£j3L*^ai^fe-^5:; 


_ Ta/sir  Ibn  Kathir 

Resurrection,  and  the 
doors  of  heaven  will  be 
opened  for  it,  and  Allah 
says,  'By  My  grace!  I 
will  certainly  grant  it 
for  you,  even  if  after  a 
while.  ,»|11 

iiji  j^\  £j  p=d 

pj  p  z<i  *  pfe  k 
pb&  &  p  u  £Q 

pie.  iyLi 

[y*$J  V*xrf.  'f^-  &-J 
\yfi\j  lj&  p  &  C^=>  U 

^  &fn  m  frZkk- 
iU  2  >'  *  £& 
<&g  %  ‘*|i  k  fQ* 

4  (iJe£Z-  Jp) 
kft  jit  JJji 

^tj  -*$;  in  ^JC, 


4187.  It  is  made  lawful  for  you  to  have  sexual  relations  with 
your  wives  on  the  night  of  As-Siydm  (fasting) .  They  are  Libds 
[ i.e .,  body-cover,  or  screen]  for  you  and  you  are  Libds  for 
them.  Allah  knows  that  you  used  to  deceive  yourselves,  so  He 
turned  to  you  ( accepted  your  repentance)  and  forgave  you .  So 
now  have  sexual  relations  with  them  and  seek  that  which  Allah 
has  ordained  for  you  (offspring),  and  eat  and  drink  until  the 
white  thread  (light)  of  dawn  appears  to  you  distinct  from  the 
black  thread  (darkness  of  night),  then  complete  your  fast  till  the 
nightfall.  And  do  not  have  sexual  relations  with  them  (your 


I'l  Ahmad  3 :544 ,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  7 :229 ,  and  Ibn  M&jah  1 :557 . 


509 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 

wives)  while  you  are  in  I'tikaf  in  the  Masjids.  These  are  the 
limits  (set)  by  Allah,  so  approach  them  not.  Thus  does  Allah 
make  clear  His  Aydt  to  mankind  that  they  may  acquire  Taqwa.) 

Bating,  Drinking  and  Sexual  Intercourse  are  allowed 
during  the  Nights  of  Ramadan 

These  Aydt  contain  a  relief  from  Allah  for  the  Muslims  by 
ending  the  practice  that  was  observed  in  the  early  years  of 
Islam.  At  that  time,  Muslims  were  allowed  to  eat,  drink  and 
have  sexual  intercourse  only  until  the  ‘Isha’  (Night)  prayer, 
unless  one  sleeps  before  the  'Isha’  prayer.  Those  who  slept 
before  ‘Isha’  or  offered  the  ‘Isha’  prayer,  were  not  allowed  to 
drink,  eat  or  sexual  intervourse  sex  until  the  next  night.  The 
Muslims  found  that  to  be  difficult  for  them. 

The  Aydt  used  the  word  ‘Rafath’  to  indicate  sexual 
intercourse,  according  to  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  ‘Ata’  and  Mujahid. 
Similar  Tafsir  was  offered  by  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Tawus,  Salim 
bin  ‘Abdullah,  ‘Amr  bin  Dinar,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Az-Zuhri, 
Ad-Dahhak,  Ibrahim  An-Nakhal,  As-Suddi,  ‘Ata’  Al-Khurasani 
and  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan. 111 

Allah  said: 

iU  20  pj  p  26 

iThey  are  Libds  [i.e.,  body-cover,  or  screen]  far  you  and  you 
are  Libas  far  them 

Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Mujahid,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah, 
As-Suddi  and  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  said  that  this  Ayah  means, 
“Your  wives  are  a  resort  for  you  and  you  for  them.”*2’  Ar-Rabl‘ 
bin  Anas  said,  “They  are  your  cover  and  you  are  their 
cover.”*3'  In  short,  the  wife  and  the  husband  are  intimate  and 
have  sexual  intercourse  with  each  other,  and  this  is  why  they 
were  permitted  to  have  sexual  activity  during  the  nights  of 
Ramadan,  so  that  matters  are  made  easier  for  them. 

Abu  Ishaq  reported  that  Al-Bara’  bin  ‘Azib  said,  “When  the 
Companions  of  Allah’s  Messenger  5j=  observed  fast  but  would 
sleep  before  breaking  their  fast,  they  would  continue  fasting 

111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :367-371 . 

*2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :370 . 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :371 . 


Surah  2.  AlzBagarah  (175  -  200)  ( Parf-2) 


511 


41A&A  'itj  fJCy* 


4 Altai i  knmvs  that  you  used  to  deceive  yourselves,  so  He  turned 
to  you  (accepted  your  repentance)  and  forgave  you.  So  timv 
have  sexual  relations  with  them}" 

This  is  the  same  narration  that  Al-‘Awfi  related  from  Ibn 
‘Abbas.1’1 
Allah  said: 


ip  &  c 

i.'.and  seek  that  which  Allah  has  ordained  far  you 
(offspring),} 

Abu  Hurayrah,  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Anas,  Shurayh  Al-Qadi,  Mujahid, 
‘Ikrimah,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  ‘Ata\  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas,  As-Suddi, 
Zayd  bin  Aslam,  Hakam  bin  ‘Utbah,  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan,  Al- 
Hasan  Al-Basri,  Ad-Dahhak,  Qatadah,  and  others  said  that 
this  Ayah  refers  to  having  offspring.'21  Qatadah  said  that  the 
Ayah  means,  “Seek  the  permission  that  Allah  has  allowed  for 
you.”  Said  narrated  that  Qatadah  said, 

iand  seek  that  which  Allah  has  ordained  for  you,} 


Time  for  Suhur 

Allah  said: 


fOi  le  gto  £i\  &  £i\  jgji  ft 


4 . .  .and  eat  and  drink  until  the  white  thread  (light)  of  dawn 
appears  to  you  distinct  from  the  black  thread  (darkness  of 
night),  then  complete  your  fast  till  the  nightfall.} 

Allah  has  allowed  eating  and  drinking,  along  with  having 
sexual  intercourse,  as  we  have  stated,  during  any  part  of  the 
night  until  the  light  of  dawn  is  distinguished  from  the 
darkness  of  the  night.  Allah  has  described  that  time  as 
‘distinguishing  the  white  thread  from  the  black  thread.’  He 


1,1  At-Tabari  3  :496-498. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  -.377-378,  and  At-Tabari  3 :506-507. 


512 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


then  made  it  clearer  when  He  said: 

OK 


iof  dawn.} 

As  stated  in  a  Hadith  that  Imam  Abu  ‘Abdullah  Al-Bukhari 
recorded,  Sahl  bin  Sa‘d  said,  “When  the  following  verse  was 
revealed: 


iEat  and  drink  until  the  white  thread  appears  to  you,  distinct 
from  the  black  thread ^ 

and  iof  dawn  A  was  not  revealed,  some  people  who  intended  to 
fast,  tied  black  and  white  threads  to  their  legs  and  went  on 
eating  till  they  differentiated  between  the  two.  Allah  then 
revealed  the  words,  iof  dawn},  and  it  became  clear  to  them  that 
it  meant  (the  darkness  of)  night  and  (the  light  of)  day.”'1' 

Al-Bukhari  recorded  that  Ash-Shahi  said  that  ‘Adi  said,  “I 
took  two  strings,  one  black  and  the  other  white  and  kept  them 
under  my  pillow  and  went  on  looking  at  them  throughout  the 
night,  but  could  not  make  any  distinction  between  the  two. 
So,  the  next  morning  I  went  to  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  and  told 
him  the  whole  story.  He  said: 


« Your  pillow  is  very  wide  if  the  white  and  black  threads  are 
under  if/*'2' 

Some  wordings  for  this  Hadith  read, 

•Your  Qafa  (back  side  of  your  neck)  is  wide /»'3' 

Some  people  said  that  these  words  meant  that  ‘Adi  was  not 
smart.  This  is  a  weak  opinion.  The  narration  that  Al-Bukhari 
collected  explains  this  part  of  the  Hadith.  Al-Bukhari  recorded 
that  ‘Adi  bin  Hatim  narrated:  I  said,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah! 
What  is  the  white  thread  from  the  black  thread?  Are  they 


m  FathAl-Bdri  8:31. 
121  Ibid. 

131  Ibid. 


523 


actual  threads?”  He  said: 

j*  ji  y  j»-5  ijlkliJl  jf  liiJi  J  Jjjj» 


*Your  Qafa  is  wide  if  you  see  the  two  threads.  Rather,  they  are 
the  blackness  of  the  night  and  the  whiteness  of  the  daylight .  ®hl 


Suhur  ^  is  recommended 

Allah  allowed  eating  and  drinking  until  dawn,  it  represents 
proof  that  Suhur  is  encouraged,  since  it  is  a  Rukhsah 
(concession  or  allowance)  and  Allah  likes  that  the  Rukhsah  is 
accepted  and  implemented.  The  authentic  Sunnah  indicates 
that  eating  the  Suhur  is  encouraged.  It  is  reported  in  the  Two 
Sahihs  that  Anas  narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  5^5  said: 

"Eat  the  Suhiir,  far  there  is  a  blessing  in  Suhur  ,»|31 

Muslim  reported  that  ‘Amr  bin  Al-‘As  narrated  that  Allah’s 
Messenger  said: 

Jif  £  U  JjJ  !){» 

'‘The  distinction  between  our  fast  and  the  fast  of  the  People  of 
the  Book  is  the  meal  of  Suhiir.^ 

Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  Abu  Said  narrated  that  Allah’s 
Messenger  jg  said: 


ji  ISf  *iS\ 


I  iffa'  j  ji  "A* 


"Suhur  is  a  blessed  meal.  Hence,  do  not  abandon  it,  even  if  one 
just  takes  a  sip  of  ivater.  Indeed,  Allah  and  His  angels  send 
Salah  (blessings)  upon  those  who  cat  Suhiir .»,s* 

There  are  several  other  Hadtths  that  encourage  taking  the 


111  Ibid. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  4 : 1 65  and  Muslim  2  :770. 
131  Muslim  2:771 . 

Ahmad  3 :44 . 

Predawn  meal  taken  before  fasting. 


514 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Suhur,  even  if  it  only  consists  of  a  sip  of  water. 

It  is  preferred  that  Suhur  be  delayed  until  the  time  of  dawn. 
It  is  recorded  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  Anas  bin  Malik  narrated 
that  Zayd  bin  Thabit  said,  “We  had  Suhur  with  Allah’s 
Messenger  jg  and  then  went  on  to  pray.”  Anas  asked,  “How 
much  time  was  there  between  the  Adhan  (call  to  prayer)  and 
the  Suhur?”  He  said,  “The  time  that  fifty  Ay  at  take  (to 
recite).”1 11 

Imam  Ahmad  recorded  Abu  Dharr  saying  that  Allah’s 
Messenger  sg  said: 


l N  B 


«My  Ummah  will  always  retain  goodness  as  long  as  they 
hasten  in  breaking  the  fast  and  delay  the  Suhur. 8,21 

There  are  several  Hadiths  that  narrate  that  the  Prophet  jg 
called  Suhur  “the  blessed  meal.” 

There  are  narrations  from  several  of  the  Salaf  that  they 
allowed  the  Suhur  to  be  eaten  later  until  close  to  Fajr.  This  is 
is  reported  from  Abu  Bakr,  ‘Umar,  ‘Ali,  Ibn  Mas'fld, 
Hudhayfah,  Abu  Hurayrah,  Ibn  ‘Umar,  Ibn  ‘Abbas  and  Zayd 
bin  Thabit.  It  is  also  reported  from  many  of  the  Tabi'in,  such 
as  Muhammad  bin  ‘Ali  bin  Husayn,  Abu  Mijlaz,  Ibrahim  An- 
Nakha*i,  Abu  Ad-Duha,  Abu  Wa’il  and  other  companions  of 
Ibn  Mas'ud.  This  is  also  the  opinion  of  ‘Ata’,  Al-Hasan,  Hakam 
bin  TJyainah,  Mujahid,  ‘Urwah  bin  Az-Zubayr,  Abu  Sha“tha’ 
Jabir  bin  Zayd,  Al-  A'mash  and  Ma'mar  bin  Rashid.  We  have 
mentioned  the  chains  of  narrations  for  their  statements  in  our 
(Ibn  Kathlr’s)  book  about  Siyam  (Fasting),  and  all  praise  is  due 
to  Allah. 


It  is  also  recorded  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  Al-Qasim  said  that 
‘A’ishah  narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said: 


^ yij~* b  v ^  i ^ jy**-**  tjA  *Vb 

ji_j j  Si  ^j>\  jlil  I 


«77ie  Adhan  pronounced  by  Bilal  should  not  stop  you  from 
taking  Suhur,  for  he  pronounces  the  Adhan  at  night.  Hence, 
eat  and  drink  until  you  hear  the  Adhan  by  Ibn  Umm  Maktum, 


Fath  Al-Bari  4 :164  and  Muslim  2 :771 . 
121  Ahmad  5:147. 


Surah  2.  Al-Bagarah  (175  -  200)  ( Part 21 


515 


for  he  does  not  call  the  Adhan  until  dawn. 11 


This  is  the  wording  collected  by  Al-Bukhari. 

Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  Qays  bin  Talq  quoted  from  his 
father  that  Allah’s  Messenger  said: 


S/I  jflj  j»Vi  j,  JjLLiUi 


«Dawn  is  not  the  (ascending)  gloio  of  white  light  of  the 
horizon.  Rather,  it  is  the  red  (radiating)  light .»I2) 

Abu  Dawud  and  At-Tirmidhi  also  recorded  this  Hadtth,  but 
their  wording  is: 


& 


r"  IjlSi  >  ■>» Jz«Jl  ^»LLJl  Vj  ilf  'Jilj  I jiS> 

•UiSii 


“Eat  and  drink  and  do  not  be  rushed  by  the  ascending  (white) 
light.  Eat  and  drink  until  the  redness  (of  the  dawn)  appears. »13* 

Ibn  Jarir  (At-Tabari)  recorded  that  Samurah  bin  Jundub 
narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  ig  said: 

J '*■  ~  tfi  Uj  jlif 

«Do  not  be  stopped  by  Bilal's  Adhan  or  the  (ascending) 
whiteness,  until  it  spreads .»14’ 

Muslim  also  recorded  this  Hadith)S] 


There  is  no  Harm  in  beginning  the  Fast  while  Junub  (a 
state  of  major  ritual  impurity) 

Issue:  Among  the  benefits  of  allowing  sexual  activity,  eating 
and  drinking  until  dawn  for  those  who  are  fasting,  is  that  it  is 
allowed  to  start  the  fast  while  Junub  (in  the  state  of  impurity 
after  sexual  discharge),  and  there  is  no  harm  in  this  case  if 
one  takes  a  bath  any  time  in  the  morning  after  waking  up, 
and  completes  the  fast.  This  is  the  opinion  of  the  Four  Imams 
and  the  majority  of  the  scholars.  Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim 
recorded  that  ‘A’ishah  and  Umm  Salamah  said  that  Allah’s 

^  Fath  Al-Bari  4  :162,  and  Muslim  2  :768. 

*2*  Ahmad  4  :23. 

•3|  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  3 :389 . 

|4)  At-Tabari  3:517. 

151  Muslim  2:769. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 


517 


"The  people  will  retain  goodness  as  long  as  they  hasten  in 
breaking  the  fast.^ 


Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  narrated  that  the 
Prophet  jg  said: 


i si^  4*^  •  Jr)  J  Ji1 


• Allah  the  Exalted  said,  ‘ The  dearest  among  My  servants  to  Me 
are  those  who  hasten  in  breaking  the  fast  the  most.'W 

At-Tirmidhi  recorded  this  Hadith  and  said  that  this  Hadith  is 
ifasan  Gharib J3' 


Prohibition  of  Uninterrupted  Fasting  (Wisat) 

There  are  several  authentic  Hadiths  that  prohibit  Al-Wisal, 
which  means  continuing  the  fast  through  the  night  to  the  next 
night,  without  eating.  Imam  Ahmad  recorded  Abu  Hurayrah 
saying  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said: 


Ij  Jl  'f&L  i-J  <3)1  J^U  MjJU 


IT  .  •  *  "  *'  .*  t  > 


«Do  not  practice  Al-Wtsdl  in  fasting  J  So,  they  said  to  him, 
“But  you  practice  Al-Wisal,  O  Allah’s  Messenger!”  The 
Prophet  replied,  “ «/  am  not  like  you ,  I  am  given  food  and 
drink  during  my  sleep  by  my  Lord.* 

So,  when  the  people  refused  to  stop  Al-Wisal ,  the  Prophet 
fasted  two  days  and  two  nights  (along  with  those  who  practiced 
Wisatj  and  then  they  saw  the  crescent  moon  (of  the  month  of 
Shawwal).  The  Prophet  ^  said  to  them  (angrily): 


the  crescent  had  not  appeared ,  I  would  have  made  you  fast 
for  a  longer  period .* 

That  was  as  a  punishment  for  them  (when  they  refused  to 
stop  practicing  Al-Wisal This  Hadith  is  also  recorded  in  the 
Sahxhayn. 


^  Fath  Al-Bari  4 :234  and  Muslim  2 :771 . 

121  Ahmad  2:237. 

^  Tuhfat  Al-Ahivadhi  3 :386 . 

Ahmad  2 :281 ,  Fath  Al-Bdri  4 :238 ,  and  Muslim  2 :774 . 


518 


Tafsir  Ibn  KathiL 


The  prohibition  of  Al-Wisal  was  also  mentioned  in  a  number 
of  other  narrations.  It  is  a  fact  that  practicing  Al-Wisal  was 
one  of  the  special  qualities  of  the  Prophet  jg,  for  he  was 
capable  and  assisted  in  his  practice  of  it.  It  is  obvious  that  the 
food  and  drink  that  the  Prophet  sg  used  to  get  while  practicing 
Al-Wisal  was  spiritual  and  not  material,  otherwise  he  would  not 
be  practicing  Al-WisdL  We  should  mention  that  it  is  allowed  to 
refrain  from  breaking  the  fast  from  sunset  until  before  dawn 
[Suhur).  A  Hadith  narrated  by  Abu  Said  Khudri  states  that 
Allah’s  Messenger  sg  said: 

« Ji  j ~?Vy.  ji  siji  y'» 


“Do  not  practice  Al-Wisal,  but  whoever  wishes  is  allowed  to 
practice  it  until  the  Suhur  J 

They  said,  “You  practice  Al-Wisal,  O  Messenger  of  Allah!”  He 
said: 


J l—j  p-4**  Jt  ^y!11 


«/  am  not  similar  to  you,  for  I  have  One  Who  makes  me  eat 
and  drink  during  the  night.* 

This  Hadith  is  also  collected  in  the  Two  Sahihs)1^ 


The  Rulings  of  Vtikaf 

Allah  said: 


4  4 


iAnd  do  not  have  sexual  relations  with  them  (your  wives)  while 
you  are  in  Vtikaf  in  the  Masjids .  ^ 

‘Ali  bin  Abu  Talhah  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “This 
Ayah  is  about  the  man  who  stays  in  Vtikaf  at  the  mosque 
during  Ramadan  or  other  months,  Allah  prohibited  him  from 
touching  (having  sexual  intercourse  with)  women,  during  the 
night  or  day,  until  he  finishes  his  Vtikaf. ”*21  Ad-Dahhak  said, 
“Formerly,  the  man  who  practiced  Vtikaf  would  go  out  of  the 
mosque  and,  if  he  wished,  would  have  sexual  intercourse  (with 
his  wife).  Allah  then  said: 


111  Fath  Al-Bari  4 :338 . 
121  At-Tabari  3:540. 


519 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200}  (Part-2) 

iAnd  do  not  Imve  sexual  relations  with  them  ( your  wives)  while 

you  are  in  I'tikdf  in  the  Masjids  > 

meaning,  ‘Do  not  touch  your  .wives  as  long  as  you  are  in 
I'tikdf,  whether  you  were  in  the  mosque  or  outside  of  it*."*1*  It 
is  also  the  opinion  of  Mujahid,  Qatadah  and  several  other 
scholars,  that  the  Muslims  used  to  have  sexual  intercourse 
with  the  wife  while  in  I'tikdf  if  they  departed  the  mosque  until 
the  Ayah  was  revealed.12*  Ibn  Abu  Hatim  commented,  “It  was 
reported  that  Ibn  Mas*ud,  Muhammad  bin  Ka*b,  Mujahid,  ‘Ata’ 
Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Ad-Dahhak,  As-Suddi,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas 
and  Muqatil  said  that  the  Ayah  means,  ‘Do  not  touch  the  wife 
while  in  I'tikdf. ”’13* 

What  Ibn  Abu  Hatim  reported  from  these  people  is  the 
agreed  upon  practice  among  the  scholars.  Those  who  are  in 
I'tikdf  are  not  allowed  to  have  sexual  intercourse  as  long  as 
they  are  still  in  I'tikdf  in  the  mosque.  If  one  has  to  leave  the 
mosque  to  attend  to  a  need,  such  as  to  relieve  the  call  of 
nature  or  to  eat,  he  is  not  allowed  to  kiss  or  embrace  his  wife 
or  to  busy  himself  with  other  than  his  rtikaf  He  is  not  even 
allowed  to  visit  ailing  persons,  but  he  can  merely  ask  about 
their  condition  while  passing  by.  I'tikdf  has  several  other 
rulings  that  are  explained  in  the  books  (of  Fiqh),  and  we  have 
mentioned  several  of  these  rulings  at  the  end  of  our  book  on 
Siyam  (Fasting),  all  praise  is  due  to  Allah.  Furthermore,  the 
scholars  of  Fiqh  used  to  follow  their  explanation  of  the  rules 
for  fasting  with  the  explanation  of  the  rules  for  I'tikdf,  as  this 
is  the  way  these  acts  of  worship  were  mentioned  in  the 
Qur’an. 

By  mentioning  rtikaf  after  fasting,  Allah  draws  attention  to 
practicing  I'tikdf  during  the  month  of  the  fast,  especially  the 
last  part  of  the  month.  The  Sunnah  of  Allah’s  Messenger  sg  is 
that  he  used  to  perform  I'tikdf  during  the  last  ten  nights  of  the 
month  of  Ramadan  until  he  died.  Afterwards,  the  Prophet’s 
wives  used  to  perform  I'tikdf  as  the  Two  Sahihs  recorded  from 
‘A’ishah  the  Mother  of  the  believers.14* 


111  At-Tabari  3 :541 . 

121  At-Tabari  3:541 . 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :385-387. 

*4*  Fath  Al-Bari  4 :318  and  Muslim  2  :831 . 


520 


Tafsir  L bn  Katlur 

It  is  reported  in  the  Two  SahOis  that  Safiyyah,  the  daughter 
of  Huyal,  went  to  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  to  visit  him  in  the 
mosque  while  he  was  in  1‘tikaf.  She  had  a  talk  with  him  for  a 
while,  then  she  got  up  in  order  to  return  home.  The  Prophet  jg 
accompanied  her  back  home,  as  it  was  night.  Her  house  was  at 
Usamah  bin  Zayd’s  house  on  the  edge  of  Al-Madlnah.  While 
they  were  walking,  two  Ansari  men  met  them  and  passed  by 
them  in  a  hurry,  for  they  were  shy  to  bother  the  Prophet  gg 
while  he  was  walking  with  his  wife.  He  told  them: 


“Do  not  run  away!  She  is  (my  wife)  Safiyyah  bint  Huyai .» 

Both  of  them  said,  “All  praise  is  due  to  Allah,  (How  dare  we 
think  of  any  evil)  O  Allah’s  Messenger!”  The  Prophet  jig  said  (to 
them): 


^  J*  ijj*i  jUal!)'  jl» 

:  JU  j\ 


» Shay  tan  reaches  everywhere  in  the  human  body,  that  the  blood 
reaches .  I  was  afraid  lest  Shay  tan  might  suggest  an  evil  thought 
in  your  minds. »,l) 

Imam  Ash-Shafi!  commented,  “Allah’s  Messenger  jg  sought 
to  teach  his  Ummah  to  instantly  eliminate  any  evil  thought,  so 
that  they  do  not  fall  into  the  prohibited.  They  (the  two  Ansari 
men)  had  more  fear  of  Allah  than  to  think  evil  of  the  Prophet 
jig.  Allah  knows  best.” 

The  Ayah  (2:187)  prohibits  sexual  intercourse  and  anything 
like  kissing  or  embracing  that  might  lead  to  it  during  I'tikaf. 
As  for  having  the  wife  helping  the  husband,  it  is  allowed.  It  is 
reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  ‘A’ishah  said,  “Allah’s 
Messenger  jjg  would  bring  his  head  near  me  (in  her  room)  and  I 
would  comb  his  hair,  while  I  was  on  my  menses.  He  would 
enter  the  room  only  to  attend  to  what  a  man  needs. ”,2) 

Allah’s  statement: 


1 1 1  Fath  Al-Bari  4 :326  and  MusUm  4:1712. 
121  Fath  Al-Bari  4 :320  and  Muslim  1 :244 . 


521 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 


iThese  are  the  limits  (set)  by  Allah } 


means,  This  is  what  We  have  explained,  ordained,  specified, 
allowed  and  prohibited  for  fasting.  We  also  mentioned  the 
fast’s  objectives,  what  is  permitted  during  it,  and  what  is 
required  of  it.  These  are  the  set  limits  that  Allah  has  legislated 
and  explained,  so  do  not  come  near  them  or  transgress  them.’ 
‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Zayd  bin  Aslam  said,  “(Allah’s  set  limits 
mentioned  in  the  Ayah)  mean  these  four  limits  (and  he  then 
recited): 


di  &&  ^  S3  ^ 


ilt  is  made  lawful  for  you  to  have  sexual  relations  xuith  your 
wives  on  the  night  of  As-Siydm  (fasting).} 

and  he  recited  up  to: 


ithcn  complete  your  Sawm  (fast)  till  the  nightfall .} 

My  father  and  other’s  used  to  say  similarly  and  recite  the 
same  Ayah  to  us.” 

Allah  said: 


iThus  does  Allah  make  clear  His  Aydt  to  mankind} 

meaning,  ‘Just  as  He  explains  the  fast  and  its  rulings,  He  also 
explains  the  other  rulings  by  the  words  of  His  servant  and 
Messenger,  Muhammad  Sfe-’  Allah  continues: 


ito  mankind  that  they  may  attain  Taqwq 


meaning,  'So  that  they  know  how  to  acquire  the  true  guidance 
and  how  to  worship  (Allah)/  Similarly,  Allah  said: 


is  He  Who  sends  down  manifest  Aydt  to  His  servant 
(Muhammad  that  He  may  bring  you  out  from  (types  of) 
darkness  into  the  light.  And  verily,  Allah  is  to  you  full  of 
kindness ,  Most  Merciful (57:9) 


522 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlur 


<J oi  '-VJ1  -A£=£lJ  Jj  I4J  jkil  jJSlJ  j^Jyl  ijlflj 


4188.  And  eat  up  not  one  another's  property  unjustly  (in  any 
illegal  way,  e.g.,  stealing,  robbing,  deceiving),  nor  give  bribery 
to  the  rulers  (judges  before  presenting  your  cases)  that  you  may 
knowingly  eat  up  a  part  of  the  property  of  others  sinfully  .> 


Bribery  is  prohibited  and  is  a  Sin 

‘Ali  bin  Abu  Talhah  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “This 
( Ayah  2:188)  is  about  the  indebted  person  when  there  is  no 
evidence  of  the  loan.  So  he  denies  taking  the  loan  and  the 
case  goes  to  the  authorities,  even  though  he  knows  that  it  is 
not  his  money  and  that  he  is  a  sinner,  consuming  what  is  not 
allowed  for  him.”*1'  This  opinion  was  also  reported  from 
Mujahid,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  ‘Ikrimah,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  As- 
Suddi,  Muqatil  bin  Hayan  and  ‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Zayd  bin 
Aslam.  They  all  stated,  “Do  not  dispute  when  you  know  that 
you  are  being  unjust. ’’,21 


The  Judge’s  Ruling  does  not  allow  the  Prohibited  or 
prohibit  the  Lawful 


It  is  reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  Umm  Salamah  narrated 
that  Allah’s  Messenger  said: 


ot  jl  t  UjI j  Ul  l»i[ 

j\  IfL-Alli  ijU  ja  Siia i  ^  4}  .i.t.A? 


0/  am  only  hutnan!  You  people  present  your  cases  to  me,  and 
as  some  of  you  may  be  more  eloquent  and  persuasive  in 
presenting  his  argument,  I  might  issue  a  judgment  in  his 
benefit.  So,  if  I  give  a  Muslim's  right  to  another,  l  am  really 
giving  him  a  piece  of  fire;  so  he  should  not  take  itV3* 

The  Ayah  and  the  Hadith  prove  that  the  judgment  of  the 

111  At-Tabari  3:550. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :393-394,  and  At-Tabari  3 : 550-551 . 

131  Fath  Al-Bari  13 :190,  and  Muslim  3  : 1373. 


523 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  ( Part-2 ) 


authorities  in  any  case  does  not  change  the  reality  of  the  truth. 
Hence,  the  ruling  does  not  allow  what  is  in  fact  prohibited  or 
prohibit  what  is  in  fact  allowed.  It  is  only  applicable  in  that 
case.  So  if  the  ruling  agrees  with  the  truth,  then  there  is  no 
harm  in  this  case.  Otherwise,  the  judge  will  acquire  his  reward, 
while  the  cheater  will  acquire  the  evil  burden. 

This  is  why  Allah  said: 


iAtid  eat  up  not  one  another's  property  unjustly,  nor  give 
bribery  to  the  rulers  (judges  before  presenting  your  cases)  that 
you  may  knowingly  eat  up  a  part  of  the  property  of  others 
sinfully. $ 


meaning,  *While  you  know  the  falsehood  of  what  you  claim.’ 
Qatadah  said,  “O  son  of  Adam!  Know  that  the  judge’s  ruling 
does  not  allow  you  what  is  prohibited  or  prohibit  you  from 
what  is  allowed.  The  judge  only  rules  according  to  his  best 
judgment  and  according  to  the  testimony  of  the  witnesses.  The 
judge  is  only  human  and  is  bound  to  make  mistakes.  Know 
that  if  the  judge  erroneously  rules  in  some  one’s  favor,  then 
that  person  will  still  encounter  the  dispute  when  the  disputing 
parties  meet  Allah  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection.  Then,  the 
unjust  person  will  be  judged  swiftly  and  precisely  with  that 
which  will  surpass  whatever  he  acquired  by  the  erroneous 
judgment  he  received  in  the  life  of  this  world.’^1* 


Z,j£\  $5  oL  ^  Lsy  £  %Ji\  £  && 


il89 .  They  ask  you  (O  Muhammad)  about  the  crescents.  Say: 
"These  are  signs  to  mark  fixed  periods  of  time  for  mankind  and 
for  the  pilgrimage It  is  not  Al-Birr  (piety,  righteousness,  etc.) 
that  you  enter  the  houses  from  the  back,  but  Al-Birr  is  from 
Taqivd.  So  enter  houses  through  their  proper  doors,  and  have 
Taqwd  of  Allah  that  you  may  be  successful 


At-Tabari  3 :550 . 


524 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kqthtr 


The  Crescent  Moons 


Al-‘Awfi  related  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “The  people  asked 
Allah’s  Messenger  £§  about  the  crescent  moons.  Thereafter, 
this  Ayah  was  revealed: 


iThey  ask  you  (O  Muhammad)  about  the  crescents.  Say, 
"These  are  signs  to  mark  fixed  periods  of  time  for  mankind...} 


so  that  they  mark  their  acts  of  worship,  the  Tddah  (the  period 
of  time  a  divorced  woman  or  a  widow  is  required  to  wait  before 
remarrying)  of  their  women  and  the  time  of  their  Hajj 
(pilgrimage  to  Makkah).”,,)  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  reported  that  Ibn 
*Umar  narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said: 


<UVl  Jill  Jiii 

•bjj 


0 Allah  has  made  the  crescents  signs  to  mark  fixed  periods  of 
time  for  mankind.  Hence,- fast  on  seeing  it  (the  crescent  for 
Ramadan)  and  break  the  fast  on  seeing  it  (the  crescent  for 
Shawwdl).  If  it  (the  crescent)  was  obscure  to  you  then  count 
thirty  days  (mark  that  month  as  thirty  days 

This  Hadith  was  also  collected  by  Al-Hakim  in  his 
Mustadrak,  and  he  said,  “The  chain  is  Sahth,  and  they  (Al- 
Bukhari  and  Muslim)  did  not  recorded  it."^ 


Righteousness  comes  from  Taqwa 

Allah  said: 


«  $5  &&  cf  1$  M  «  LJA i  #2  oL. 


ill  is  not  Al-Birr  (piety,  righteousness,  etc.)  that  you  enter  the 
houses  from  the  back,  but  Al-Birr  is  from  Taqwa.  So  enter 
houses  through  their  proper  doors.} 

Al-Bukhari  recorded  that  Al-Bara’  said,  “During  the  time  of 


111  At-Tabari  3:554. 

*2*  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  4 : 1 56 . 
131  Al-Hakim  1  :423. 


525 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 


Jahiliyyah,  they  used  to  enter  the  house  from  the  back  upon 
assuming  the  Ihram.  Thereafter,  Allah  revealed  (the  following 
Ayah): 


£  $  m  csy*  os  ^  oi 


is  not  Al-Birr  (piety,  righteousness,  etc.)  that  you  enter  the 
houses  from  the  back  but  Al-Birr  is  from  Taqwa.  So  enter 
houses  through  their  proper  doors. ^ 11 

Abu  Dawud  At-Tayalisi  recorded  the  same  Hadith  from  Al- 
Bara’  but  with  the  wording;  “The  Ansar  used  to  enter  their 
houses  from  the  back  when  returning  from  a  journey. 
Thereafter,  this  Ayah  (2:189  above)  was  revealed...”*2' 

Al-Hasan  said,  “When  some  people  during  the  time  of 
Jahiliyyah  would  leave  home  to  travel,  and  then  decide  not  to 
travel,  they  would  not  enter  the  house  from  its  door.  Rather, 
they  would  climb  over  the  back  wall.  Allah  the  Exalted  said: 

i  J*  \%  ot  V' 

ilt  is  not  Al-Birr  (piety,  righteousness)  that  you  enter  the 
houses  from  the  back,}.*™ 

Allah’s  statement: 

i...  and  have  Taqwa  of  Allah  that  you  may  be  successful .} 

Have  Taqwa  of  Allah,  means  to  do  what  He  has  commanded 
you  and  refrain  from  what  He  has  forbidden  for  you, 


4 that  you  may  be  successful.} 


tomorrow  when  you  stand  before  Him  and  He  thus  rewards 
you  perfectly. 


iii  &  4 


&-  Stj  jSK  'M 

111  Fath  Al-Bari  8:310. 

'2'  Musnad  At-Tayalisi,  98. 

*3*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :40 1 . 


•-  » >  *> 
J* 


526 


Tafsir  Ibtt  Kathir 


i#j  ou  ?$•*£»  ii>  ^at 

-'#^5  jjis.  ^  ^ 

Hi  s.jii  sjoi'tiii  4^s  v  &. 
^  je  VI  li'jM.  vi  Ijfif  0^ 

4190.  And  fight  in  the 

%,  «?z  s^£ 

^0i^'  ,,of  M{e  limits.  Trull/, 
a  t+m  jlAs  ,£*»  *  *>\\>  >~tti.<- %  Allah  likes  not  the 


£  VI  •*  aw  ^ 


,w‘  ,,,c 

4192.  And  kill  them 
*l..<  «  s.*  if  ^rever  you  find  them, 

4j^^bai«iiK^'^v^(^r!0ocr?,Al^iiAA'  fl,22f  fun(  them  out  from 

^\0ip2£&\n$&tez>$^cs  where  ihey }mve  tunwd 

\  /*  '  .  *  ".;  yow  out.  And  Al-Fitnah 

»s  zyorse  than  killing. 

iii-t&iitezti  A«dj;f‘ "°‘  ™*<jr' 

rf  ^  ,!  ^  Al-Masjta  A/-Hrtram 

?jp  *1^  (f/ic’  sanctuary  at  Mak- 

- -  kah),  unless  they  (first) 

fight  you  there.  But  if  they  attack  you,  then  kill  than.  Such  is  the 
recompense  of  the  disbelievers  .£ 


4292.  Buf  ?/  they  cease,  that  Allah  is  Oft-Forgiving,  Most  Merciful. $ 
4193.  And  fight  them  until  there  is  no  more  Fitnah  (disbelief  and 
worshipping  of  others  along  with  Allah)  and  the  religion  (all  and  every 
kind  of  worship)  is  for  Allah  (Alone).  But  if  they  cease,  let  there  be  no 
transgression  except  against  Az-Zalimui  (the  polytheists  and 
wrongdoers ).} 


The  Command  to  fight  Those  Who  fight  Muslims  and 
killing  Them  wherever  They  are  found 

Abu  Ja“far  Ar-Razi  said  that  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  said  that  Abu 
Al-‘Aliyah  commented  on  what  Allah  said: 

4-jZjfii  «£(  3ef-  4  IfeSj)1 


527 


Surah  2.  AI-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 


iAnd  fight  in  the  way  of  Allah  those  wlw  fight  you  ,} 

Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  said,  “This  was  the  first  Ayah  about  fighting 
that  was  revealed  in  Al-Madlnah.  Ever  since  it  was  revealed, 
Allah’s  Messenger  jg  used  to  fight  only  those  who  fought  him 
and  avoid  non-combatants.  Later,  Surat  Bara’ah  (chapter  9  in 
the  Qur’an)  was  revealed.”*1*  ‘Abdur- Rahman  bin  Zayd  bin 
Aslam  said  similarly,  then  he  said  that  this  was  later  abrogated 
by  the  Ayah:  ,  .  .  .  „  ^ 


4 then  kill  them  wherever  you  find  them}  (9:5). 

However,  this  statement  is  not  plausible,  because  Allah’s 
statement:  «£££ 


4 . .  .those  who  fight  you} 

applies  only  to  fighting  the  enemies  who  are  engaged  in 
fighting  Islam  and  its  people.  So  the  Ayah  means,  Tight  those 
who  fight  you’,  just  as  Allah  said  (in  another  Ayah): 


4%&=‘  p&i  iflT 


4... and  fight  against  the  Mushrikin  collectively  as  they  fight 
against  you  collectively .}™  (9:36) 

This  is  why  Allah  said  later  in  the  Ayah: 


>  ••  •  > 
^  ijt  r*xr'j 


4And  kill  them  wherever  you  find  them,  and  turn  them  out 
from  where  they  have  turned  you  out.} 

meaning,  Your  energy  should  be  spent  on  fighting  them,  just 
as  their  energy  is  spent  on  fighting  you,  and  on  expelling  them 
from  the  areas  from  which  they  have  expelled  you,  as  a  law  of 
equality  in  punishment.’ 


The  Prohibition  of  mutilating  the  Dead  and  stealing 
from  the  captured  Goods 


Allah  said: 


111  At-Tabari  3  : 561 . 
121  At-Tabari  3:562. 


528 


Tnfsir  Ibn  Kathir 


ibut  transgress  not  the  limits.  Truly,  Allah  likes  not  the 
transgressors 


This  Ayah  means,  ‘Fight  for  the  sake  of  Allah  and  do  not  be 
transgressors,’  such  as,  by  committing  prohibitions.  Al-Hasan 
Al-Basri  stated  that  transgression  (indicated  by  the  Ayah), 
“includes  mutilating  the  dead,  theft  (from  the  captured  goods), 
killing  women,  children  and  old  people  who  do  not  participate 
in  warfare,  killing  priests  and  residents  of  houses  of  worship, 
burning  down  trees  and  killing  animals  without  real  benefit.” 
This  is  also  the  opinion  of  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  ‘Umar  bin  ‘Abdul- ‘Aziz, 
Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  and  others.  Muslim  recorded  in  his  Sahih 
that  Buraydah  narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jfe  said: 


'ij  'ij  Yj  by-1  'Js  ja  1 4)1  j>  \/yu 

Vj  I jJj  \ jhjj  Vj 


« Fight  for  the  sake  of  Allah  and  fight  those  who  disbelieve  in 
Allah.  Fight,  but  do  not  steal  (from  the  captured  goods), 
commit  treachery,  mutilate  (the  dead),  or  kill  a  child,  or  those 
who  reside  in  houses  of  worship.^ 


It  is  reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  Ibn  ‘Umar  said,  “A 
woman  was  found  dead  during  one  of  the  Prophet’s  battles 
and  the  Prophet  then  forbade  killing  women  and 

children. ’’,21  There  are  many  other  Hadlths  on  this  subject. 


Shirk  is  worse  than  Killing 

Since  Jihad  involves  killing  and  shedding  the  blood  of  men, 
Allah  indicated  that  these  men  are  committing  disbelief  in 
Allah,  associating  with  Him  (in  the  worship)  and  hindering  from 
His  path,  and  this  is  a  much  greater  evil  and  more  disastrous 
than  killing.  Abu  Malik  commented  about  what  Allah  said: 

iAnd  Al-Fihiah  is  worse  than  killing. $ 

Meaning  what  you  (disbelievers)  are  committing  is  much  worse 
than  killing.  ”*31  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Mujahid,  Said  bin  Jubayr, 

111  Muslim  3:1357. 

I2*  Fath  Al-Bari  6 : 1 72  and  Muslim  3 : 1 364 . 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :412. 


529 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 

‘Ikrimah,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Ad-Dahhak  and  Ar-Rabi‘  bin 
Anas  said  that  what  Allah  said: 

iAttd  Al-Fitnah  is  worse  than  killing.} 

“ Shirk  (polytheism)  is  worse  than  killing.” 


Fighting  in  the  Sacred  Area  is  prohibited,  except  in  Self- 
Defense 

Allah  said: 


4*0*  *0%  ^ 


iAnd  fight  not  with  them  at  Al-Masjid  Al-Hardm  (the 
sanctuary  at  Makkah )} 


It  is  reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  the  Prophet  jfe  said: 

y’jL'  \\'0.  &  oi>lni  ju  fa  Jii  ^  JtiJi  \ik  lu 

j“'  •■}*  ^13  jt  J>«i  pJ3  ‘•yirfi' 

Jlii  j  Ju>- '  j|i  *3 j  .LA M  f 


“A//(j/i  lias  made  this  city  a  sanctuary  since  the  day  He  created 
the  heavens  and  the  earth.  So,  it  is  a  sanctuary  by  Allah's 
decree  till  the  Day  of  Resurrection.  Fighting  in  it  was  made 
legal  for  me  only  for  an  hour  in  the  daytime.  So,  it  (i.e., 
Makkah)  is  a  sanctuary,  by  Allah's  decree,  from  noio  on  until 
the  Day  of  Resurrection.  Its  trees  should  not  be  cut,  and  its 
grass  should  not  be  uprooted.  If  anyone  mentions  the  fighting 
in  it  that  occurred  by  Allah’s  Messenger,  then  say  that  Allah 
allowed  His  Messenger,  but  did  not  allow  i/ouV1 


In  this  Hadith ,  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  mentions  fighting  the 
people  of  Makkah  when  he  conquered  it  by  force,  leading  to 
some  deaths  among  the  polytheists  in  the  area  of  the 
Khan  dam  ah.  This  occurred  after  the  Prophet  jg  proclaimed: 


A*  Ifi J  *  Ji-S  y>j  ja* 


„  +  7 


m 


Fath  Al-Bari  6 :327  and  Muslim  2  :986-987 . 


530 


Tafsfr  Ibn  Kathir 


“Whoever  closed  his  door  is  safe.  Whoever  entered  the  (Sacred) 
Mosque  is  safe.  Whoever  entered  the  house  of  Abu  Sufyan  is 
also  safe.i>W 

Allah  said: 


$... unless  they  (first)  fight  you  there.  But  if  they  attack  you, 
then  kill  them.  Such  is  the  recompense  of  the  disbelievers. $ 

Allah  states:  Do  not  fight  them  in  the  area  of  the  Sacred 
Mosque  unless  they  start  fighting  you  in  it.  In  this  case,  you 
are  allowed  to  fight  them  and  kill  them  to  stop  their 
aggression.’  Hence,  Allah’s  Messenger  ij§  took  the  pledge  from 
his  Companions  under  the  tree  (in  the  area  of  Al-Hudaybiyyah) 
to  fight  (the  polytheists),  after  the  tribes  of  Quraysh  and  their 
allies,  Thaqif  and  other  groups,  collaborated  against  the 
Muslims  (to  stop  them  from  entering  Makkah  to  visit  the 
Sacred  House).  Then,  Allah  stopped  the  fighting  before  it 
started  between  them  and  said: 


4And  He  it  is  Who  has  withheld  their  hands  from  you  and  your 
hands  from  them  in  the  midst  of  Makkah,  after  He  had  made 
you  victors  over  them.}  (48:24) 

and: 


r  *  r- 


i'CJ)  CjSj  $>3  ji  4  iSS  Sfti 


4Had  there  not  been  believing  men  and  believing  women  whom 
you  did  not  know,  that  you  may  kill  them  and  on  whose 
account  a  sin  would  have  been  committed  by  you  without  (your) 
knowledge,  that  Allah  might  bring  into  His  tnercy  whom  He 
wills  —  if  they  (the  believers  and  the  disbelievers)  had  been 
apart,  We  verily,  would  have  punished  those  of  them  who 
disbelieved  with  painful  torment. $  (48:25) 

Allah’s  statement: 


4#; 


+  > <*  ^  <  //  /  / \ 
jjAA  illt  ojj  0*T 


111  Ahmad  2:292. 


531 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200}  (Part-2) 

}But  if  they  cease,  then  Allah  is  Oft-Forgiving,  Most 
Merciful.} 

which  means,  ‘If  they  (polytheists)  cease  fighting  you  in  the 
Sacred  Area,  and  come  to  Islam  and  repent,  then  Allah  will 
forgive  them  their  sins,  even  if  they  had  before  killed  Muslims 
in  Allah’s  Sacred  Area.’  Indeed,  Allah’s  forgiveness 
encompasses  every  sin,  whatever  its  enormity,  when  the  sinner 
repents  it. 


The  Order  to  fight  until  there  is  no  more  Fitnah 

Allah  then  commanded  fighting  the  disbelievers  when  He 
said: 

4  4^2  V  &■} 


until  there  is  no  more  Fitnah } 

meaning,  Shirk.  This  is  the  opinion  of  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Abu  Al- 
‘Aliyah,  Mujahid,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Ar-Rabl‘,  Muqatil  bin 
Hayyan,  As-Suddi  and  Zayd  bin  AslamJ1' 

Allah’s  statement: 

4  <4 


4 . .  .and  the  religion  (all  and  every  kind  of  worship)  is  for  Allah 
(Alone).} 

means,  ‘So  that  the  religion  of  Allah  becomes  dominant  above 
all  other  religions.’  It  is  reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  Abu 
Musa  Al-Ash‘ari  said:  "The  Prophet  was  asked,  ‘O  Allah’s 
Messenger!  A  man  fights  out  of  bravery,  and  smother  fights  to 
show  off,  which  of  them  fights  in  the  cause  of  Allah?’  The 
Prophet  j£s  said: 

•<3>l  Vfi  LliJl  j,*  <3)1  <115  J^5cJ  jili  jl' 

•He  who  fights  so  that  Allah's  Word  is  superior,  then  he  fights 
in  Allah's  cause. «|2)  In  addition,  it  is  reported  in  the  Two 
Sahihs: 


^  La <  <3)1  V)  ilj  \ J jlil  01 


m  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :415-416. 

121  Path  Al-Bari  1 3 :450  and  Muslim  3:1513. 


533 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) _ 

Allah’.”*11 

Under  Allah's  statement: 

4-Ajid  fight  them  until  there  is  no  more  Fitnah } 

Al-Bukhari  recorded  that  Nafi‘  said  that  two  men  came  to  Ibn 
Umar  during  the  conflict  of  Ibn  Az-Zubayr  and  said  to  him, 
“The  people  have  fallen  into  shortcomings  and  you  are  the  son 
of  Umar  and  the  Prophet’s  Companion.  Hence,  what  prevents 
you  from  going  out?”  He  said,  “What  prevents  me  is  that  Allah 
has  for  bidden  shedding  the  blood  of  my  (Muslim)  brother.” 
They  said,  “Did  not  Allah  say: 

4And  fight  them  until  there  is  no  more  Fitnah  (disbelief  and 
worshipping  of  others  along  with  Allah)}?” 

He  said,  “We  did  fight  until  there  was  no  more  Fitnah  and  the 
religion  became  for  Allah  Alone.  You  want  to  fight  until  there 
is  Fitnah  and  the  religion  becomes  for  other  than  Allah!” 

Uthman  bin  Salih  added  that  a  man  came  to  Ibn  Umar  and 
asked  him,  “O  Abu  ‘Abdur- Rahman!  What  made  you  perform 
Hajj  one  year  and  ‘Umrah  another  year  and  abandon  Jihad  in 
the  cause  of  Allah,  although  you  know  how  much  He  has 
encouraged  performing  it?”  He  said,  “O  my  nephew!  Islam  is 
built  on  five  (pillars):  believing  in  Allah  and  His  Messenger,  the 
five  daily  prayers,  fasting  Ramadan,  paying  the  Zakah  and 
performing  Hajj  (pilgrimage)  to  the  House.”  They  said,  “O  Abu 
‘Abdur-Rahman!  Did  you  not  hear  what  Allah  said  in  His 
Book: 

4$  III 

iAnd  if  two  parties  (or  groups)  among  the  believers  fall  to 
fighting,  then  make  peace  between  them  both.  But  if  one  of 
them  outrages  against  tlte  other,  then  fight  you  (all)  against  the 
one  that  which  outrages  till  it  complies  with  the  command  of 
Allah.}  (49:9)  and: 

m 


At-Tabari  3 :573 . 


534 


Tafsfr  Tbn  Katlur 


4And  fight  them  until  there  is  no  more  Fitnah  (disbelief)?} 

He  said,  “That  we  did  during  the  time  of  Allah’s  Messenger 
when  Islam  was  still  weak  and  (the  Muslim)  man  used  to 
face  trials  in  his  religion,  such  as  killing  or  torture.  When  Islam 
became  stronger  (and  apparent),  there  was  no  more  Fitnah.”  He 
asked,  “What  do  you  say  about  *Ali  and  TJthman?”  He  said,  “As 
for  TJthman,  Allah  has  forgiven  him.  However,  you  hated  the 
fact  that  Allah  had  forgiven  him!  As  for  ‘Ali,  he  is  the  cousin  of 
Allah’s  Messenger  jjg  and  his  son-in-law.”  He  then  pointed  with 
his  hand,  saying,  “This  is  where  his  house  is  located  (meaning, 
‘so  close  to  the  Prophet’s  house  just  as  ‘Ali  was  so  close  to  the 
Prophet  himself). 11 


G  £5  &  ££  tfctf  **  jfi  Ji\ 

^  *  3 *  !#» 


4194.  The  sacred  month  is  for  the  sacred  month,  and  for  the 
prohibited  things,  there  is  the  Law  of  equality  (Qisds).  Then 
whoever  transgresses  against  you,  you  transgress  likewise 
against  him.  And  fear  Allah,  and  know  that  Allah  is  with  Al- 
Muttaqin.} 


Fighting  during  the  Sacred  Months  is  prohibited,  except 
in  Self-Defense 

Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Ad-Dahhak,  As-Suddi,  Qatadah,  Miqsam,  Ar- 
Rabi‘  bin  Anas  and  ‘Ata  said,  “Allah’s  Messenger  a££  went  for 
‘Umrah  on  the  sixth  year  of  Hijrah.  Then,  the  idolators 
prevented  him  from  entering  the  Sacred  House  (the  Ka'bah  in 
Makkah)  along  with  the  Muslims  who  came  with  him.  This 
incident  occurred  during  the  sacred  month  of  Dhul-Qa‘dah.  The 
idolators  agreed  to  allow  them  to  enter  the  House  the  next  year. 
Hence,  the  Prophet  jg  entered  the  House  the  following  year, 
along  with  the  Muslims  who  accompanied  him,  and  Allah 
permitted  him  to  avenge  the  idolators'  treatment  of  him,  when 
He  said: 


m 


Fath  Al-Bari  8 :32 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 


535 


&&  SP  &s  » 


$The  sacred  month  is  for  the  sacred  month,  and  for  the 
prohibited  things,  there  is  the  Law  of  equality  (Qisds).^ 

Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Jabir  bin  ‘Abdullah  said,  “Allah’s 
Messenger  ig  would  not  engage  in  warfare  during  the  Sacred 
Month  unless  he  was  first  attacked,  then  he  would  march 
forth.  He  would  otherwise  remain  idle  until  the  end  of  the 
Sacred  Months.”  This  Ifadith  has  an  authentic  chain  of 
narrators.12* 

Hence,  when  the  Prophet  was  told  that  TJthman  was  killed 
(in  Makkah)  when  he  was  camped  at  the  area  of  Al- 
Hudaybiyyah,  after  he  had  sent  TJthman  as  his  emissary  to  the 
polytheists,  he  accepted  the  pledge  from  his  Companions  under 
the  tree  to  fight  the  polytheists.  They  were  one  thousand  and 
four  hundred  then.  When  the  Prophet  was  informed  that 
TJthman  was  not  killed,  he  abandoned  the  fight  and  reverted  to 
peace. 

When  the  Prophet  jg  finished  fighting  with  (the  tribes  of) 
Hawazin  during  the  battle  of  Hunayn  and  Hawazin  took  refuge 
in  (the  city  of)  At-Ta’if,  he  laid  siege  to  that  city.  Then,  the 
(sacred)  month  of  Dhul-Qa‘dah  started,  while  At-Ta’if  was  still 
under  siege.  The  siege  went  on  for  the  rest  of  the  forty  days 
(rather,  from  the  day  the  battle  of  Hunayn  started  until  the 
Prophet  jg  went  back  to  Al-Madlnah  from  Al-Ji‘ranah,  were 
forty  days),  as  reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs  and  narrated  by 
Anas.  When  the  Companions  suffered  mounting  casualties 
(during  the  siege),  the  Prophet  sg  ended  the  siege  before 
conquering  At-Ta’if.  He  then  went  back  to  Makkah,  performed 
‘Umrah  from  Al-Ji‘ranah,  where  he  divided  the  war  booty  of 
Hunayn.  This  ‘Umrah  occurred  during  Dhul-Qa'dah  of  the 
eighth  year  of  Al-Hijrah}^ 

Allah’s  statement: 

U  j  i&L  fofy 

i... whoever  transgresses  against  you,  you  transgress  likewise 


111  At-Jabari  3 :575-577  and  579. 

121  Ahmad  3:345. 

131  Fath  Al-Bari  3  :701  and  Muslim  2  :916. 


536 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kqthir 


against  him.} 

ordains  justice  even  with  the  polytheists.  Allah  also  said  in 
another  Ayah: 

j/  1/om  punish,  then  punish  them  with  the  like  of  that 
witlt  which  you  were  afflicted.}  (16:126) 

Allah’s  statement: 


if  3  \'£X>  if  \j&i} 


iAtid  fear  Allah,  and  know  that  Allah  is  ivith  Al-Muttaqin  (the 
pious)}  (2:194) 


commands  that  Allah  be  obeyed  and  feared  out  of  Taqwa.  The 
Ayah  informs  us  that  Allah  is  with  those  who  have  Taqwa  by 
His  aid  and  support  in  this  life  and  the  Hereafter. 


U.  'if  l\  t^Sj  W  Jl  M  «  » 


4195.  And  spend  in  the  cause  of  Allah  and  do  not  throw 
yourselves  into  destruction,  and  do  good.  Truly,  Allah  loves 
Al-Multsinin  (those  who  do  good).} 


The  Command  to  spend  in  the  Cause  of  Allah 

Al-Bukhari  recorded  that  Hudhayfah  said: 

4  j^r1’  jl  fji*  "£>  i'  4  |A«»1 

}And  spend  in  the  cause  of  Allah  and  do  not  throw  yourselves 
into  destruction .} 

“It  was  revealed  about  spending.”1 11  Ibn  Abu  Hatim  reported 
him  saying  similarly.  He  then  commented,  "Similar  is  reported 
from  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Mujahid,  Ikrimah,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  ‘Ata’, 
Ad-Dahhak,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  As-Suddi  and  Muqatil  bin 
Hayyan.” 

Aslam  Abu  “Imran  said,  “A  man  from  among  the  Ansar  broke 
enemy  (Byzantine)  lines  in  Constantinople  (Istanbul).  Abu 
Ayyub  Al-Ansari  was  with  us  then.  So  some  people  said,  “He  is 
throwing  himself  to  destruction.’  Abu  Ayyub  said,  “We  know 

iiT 


Fath  Al-Bari  8 :33 . 


537 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (PartZl 

this  Ayah  (2:195)  better,  for  it  was  revealed  about  us,  the 
Companions  of  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  who  participated  in  Jihad 
with  him  and  aided  and  supported  him.  When  Islam  became 
strong,  we,  the  Ansar,  met  and  said  to  each  other,  ‘Allah  has 
honored  us  by  being  the  Companions  of  His  Prophet  jg  and  in 
supporting  him  until  Islam  became  victorious  and  its  following 
increased.  We  had  before  ignored  the  needs  of  our  families, 
estates  and  children.  Warfare  has  ceased,  so  let  us  go  back  to 
our  families  and  children  and  attend  to  them.’  So  this  Ayah 
was  revealed  about  us: 

iAnd  spend  in  the  cause  of  Allah  and  do  not  throw  yourselves 
into  destruction 

the  destruction  refers  to  staying  with  our  families  and  estates 
and  abandoning  Jihad’.”  This  was  recorded  by  Abu  Dawud,  At- 
Tirmidhi,  An-Nasal,  ‘Abd  bin  Humayd  in  his  Tafsir,  Ibn  Abu 
Hatim,  Ibn  Jarir,  Ibn  Marduwyah,  Al- Hafiz  Abu  Yala  in  his 
Musnad,  Ibn  Hibban  and  Al-Hakim.*1*  At-Tirmidhi  said; 
"Hasan,  Sahlh,  Gharib' ’*2*  Al-Hakim  said,  "It  meets  the  criteria 
of  the  Two  Shaykhs  (Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim)  but  they  did  not 
record  it." 

Abu  Dawud’s  version  mentions  that  Aslam  Abu  ‘Imran  said, 
“We  were  at  (the  siege  of)  Constantinople.  Then,  ‘Uqbah  bin 
‘Amr  was  leading  the  Egyptian  forces,  while  the  Syrian  forces 
were  led  by  Fadalah  bin  ‘Ubayd.  Later  on,  a  huge  column  of 
Roman  (Byzantine)  soldiers  departed  the  city,  and  we  stood  in 
lines  against  them.  A  Muslim  man  raided  the  Roman  lines 
until  he  broke  through  them  and  came  back  to  us.  The  people 
shouted,  ‘All  praise  is  due  to  Allah!  He  is  sending  himself  to 
certain  demise.’  Abu  Ayyub  said,  ‘O  people!  You  explain  this 
Ayah  the  wrong  way.  It  was  revealed  about  us,  the  Ansar 
when  Allah  gave  victory  to  His  religion  and  its  following 
increased.  We  said  to  each  other,  It  would  be  better  for  us 
now  if  we  return  to  our  estates  and  attend  to  them.’  Then 

111  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8:311,  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubrd  6:299,  Ibn  Abi 
Hatim  1 :424,  At-Tabari  3:590,  Ibn  Hibban  7:105,  and  Al-Hakim 
2:775. 

^  That  is,  almost  the  level  of  Safuh. 


538 


Tafsir  [bit  Kathtr 


Allah  revealed  this  Ayah  (2:195),.”[1* 

Abu  Bakr  bin  ‘Aiyash  reported  that  Abu  Ishaq  As-Subai“y 
related  that  a  man  said  to  Al-Bara’  bin  ‘Azib,  “If  I  raided  the 
enemy  lines  alone  and  they  kill  me,  would  I  be  throwing 
myself  to  certain  demise?”  He  said,  “No.  Allah  said  to  His 
Messenger 


iThen  fight  (O  Muhammad  grj  in  the  cause  of  Allah,  you  are 
not  tasked  (held  responsible)  except  for  yourself (4:84) 

That  Ayah  (2:195)  is  about  (refraining  from)  spending.”  Ibn 
Marduwyah  reported  this  Hadith,  as  well  as  Al-Hakim  in  his 
Mustadrak  who  said;  "It  meets  the  criteria  of  the  Two 
Shaykhs  (Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim)  but  they  did  not  record  it." 
Ath-Thawri  and  Qays  bin  Ar-Rabl‘  related  it  from  Al-Bara’.  but 
added: 


iYou  are  not  tasked  (held  responsible)  except  for  yourself > 
(4:84) 

“Destruction  refers  to  the  man  who  sins  and  refrains  from 
repenting,  thus  throwing  himself  to  destruction.” 

Ibn  ‘Abbas  said: 

iAnd  spend  in  the  cause  of  Allah  and  do  not  throw  yourselves 
into  destruction } 

“This  is  not  about  fighting.  But  about  refraining  from  spending 
for  the  sake  of  Allah,  in  which  case,  one  will  be  throwing  his 
self  into  destruction." 

The  Ayah  (2:195)  includes  the  order  to  spend  in  Allah’s 
cause,  in  the  various  areas  and  ways  that  involve  obedience 
and  drawing  closer  to  Allah.  It  especially  applies  to  spending 
in  fighting  the  enemies  and  on  what  strengthens  the  Muslims 
against  the  enemy.  Allah  states  that  those  who  refrain  from 
spending  in  this  regard  will  face  utter  and  certain  demise  and 
destruction,  meaning  those  who  acquire  this  habit.  Allah 


111  Abu  DSwud  3:27. 


539 


Surat  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 

commands  that  one  should  acquire  Ihsan  (excellence  in  the 
religion),  as  it  is  the  highest  part  of  the  acts  of  obedience. 
Allah  said: 

iand  do  good.  Truly,  Allah  loves  Al-Muhsinin  (those  who  do 
good).) 


%  &■  &&  g  iu  y, 

•> . 1  r-.r  V*  .f  .1  -  'A  V- 

^  j'  J'  -<-fb  oi  **  j'  ^ 

lit  4  ,Q  jli:  fCf>  3*  8  jp  j<  pX  '£S  £ 

cJ  !5*M>  «»'  'jij'j  ^  JlJ  si*!?  Vfu. 

I _ j\2a^  JtJU.  <jjl 

'  - >  .  .. 


4196.  A»d  complete  Hajj  and  ‘ Umrah  for  Allah.  But  if  you  are 
prevented,  then  sacrifice  a  Hady  that  you  can  afford,  and  do 
not  shave  your  heads  until  the  Hady  reaches  the  place  of 
sacrifice.  And  whosoever  of  you  is  ill  or  has  an  ailment  on  his 
scalp  (necessitating  shaving),  he  must  pay  a  Fidyah  (ransom)  of 
either  fasting  or  giving  Sadaqah  or  a  sacrifice.  Then  if  you  are 
in  safety  and  whosoever  performs  the  'Umrah  (in  the  months  of 
Hajj),  before  (performing)  the  Hajj,  he  must  slaughter  a  Hady 
such  as  he  can  afford,  but  if  he  cannot  (afford  it),  he  should  fast 
for  three  days  during  Hajj  and  seven  days  after  his  return, 
making  ten  days  in  all.  This  is  for  him  whose  family  is  not 
present  at  Al-Masjid  Al-Hardm  (i.e.,  non-resident  of  Makkah). 
And  fear  Allah  much  and  know  that  Allah  is  severe  in 
punishment .) 


The  Command  to  complete  Hajj  and  ‘Umrah 

After  Allah  mentioned  the  rulings  for  fasting  and  Jihad,  he 
explained  the  rituals  by  commanding  the  Muslims  to  complete 
Hajj  and  ‘Umrah,  meaning,  to  finish  the  rituals  of  Hajj  and 
‘Umrah  after  one  starts  them.  This  is  why  Allah  said 
afterwards: 


4.} rfrA 


iBut  if  you  are  prevented) 


540 


Tafsfr  ton  KaDur 

meaning,  if  your  way  to  the  House  is  obstructed,  and  you  are 
prevented  from  finishing  it.  This  is  why  the  scholars  agree  that 
starting  the  acts  of  Hajj  and  ‘Umrah  requires  one  to  finish 
them.  As  for  Makhul,  he  said,  “Complete,  means  to  start  them 
from  the  Miqat  (areas  the  Prophet  jg  designated  to  assume 
Diram  from).”*11  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  said  that  Az-Zuhri  said:  “We 
were  told  that  Umar  commented  on: 

4  A  &*>!*  gp 

4  And  complete  Hajj  and  'Umrah  for  Allah. 4 

“Complete  Hajj  and  ‘Umrah  means  performing  each  of  them 
separately,  and  to  perform  ‘Umrah  outside  of  the  months  of 
Hajj,  for  Allah  the  Exalted  says: 


4The  Hajj  (pilgrimage)  is  (in)  the  well-known  (lunar  year) 
months }’™ 

As-Suddi  said, 

4 And  complete  Hajj  and  'Umrah  for  Allah.} 

means,  “Maintain  the  performance  of  Hajj  and  ‘Umrah.  ”*31  Ibn 
‘Abbas  was  reported  to  have  said,  “ Hajj  is  ‘Arafat,  while  "Umrah 
is  Tawaf.”14*  Al-A‘mash  related  that  Ibrahim  said  that 
‘Alqamah  commented  on  Allah’s  statement: 

4‘A 

4And  complete  Hajj  and  'Umrah  for  Allah.} 

“Abdullah  (Ibn  Mas’ud)  recited  it  this  way:  ‘Complete  Hajj  and 
‘Umrah  to  the  House,  so  that  one  does  not  exceed  the  area  of 
the  House  during  the  ‘Umrah’.”  Ibrahim  then  said,  “I 
mentioned  this  statement  to  Said  bin  Jubayr  and  he  said;  Ibn 
‘Abbas  also  said  that.’”15’  Sufyan  reported  that  Ibrahim  said 

111  Ibn  Abi  HStim  1 :437. 

121  Ibid. 

I3*  At-Jabari  4:12. 

I4*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :439. 

■5|  At-Tabari  4 :7 . 


541 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 

that  ‘Alqamah  said  (regarding  the  Ayah  2:196),  “Perform  the 
Hajj  and  ‘Umrah  to  the  House. Ath-Thawri  reported  that 
Ibrahim  read  (the  Ayah),  “Perform  the  Hajj  and  'Umrah  to  the 
House.” 

If  One  is  prevented  while  in  Route,  He  slaughters  the 
Sacrifice,  shaves  his  Head  and  ends  Ihram 

Allah’s  statement: 

Si  J— 0 

iBut  if  you  are  prevented,  sacrifice  a  Hady  (animals  for 
sacrifice)  such  as  you  can  afford, } 

was  revealed  in  the  sixth  year  of  Hijrah,  the  year  of  the  treaty 
of  Al-Hudaybiyyah  when  the  polytheists  prevented  Allah’s 
Messenger  jg  from  reaching  the  House.  Allah  revealed  Surat 
Al-Fath  (chapter  48  in  the  Qur’an)  then,  and  allowed  the 
Muslims  to  slaughter  any  Hady  (animals  for  sacrifice)  they  had. 
They  had  seventy  camels  with  them  for  that  purpose.  They  were 
also  permitted  to  shave  their  heads  and  end  their  Ihram.  When 
the  Prophet  jg  commanded  them  to  shave  their  heads  and  end 
the  state  of  Ihram,  they  did  not  obey  him,  as  they  were  awaiting 
that  order  to  be  abrogated.  When  they  saw  that  the  Prophet  jg 
went  out  after  shaving  his  head,  they  imitated  him.  Some  of 
them  did  not  shave,  but  only  shortened  their  hair.  This  is  why 
the  Prophet  jg  said: 

«*ii 

*May  Allah  award  His  mercy  to  those  who  shaved .» 

They  said,  “What  about  those  who  shortened  the  hair?”  He 
said  in  the  third  time,  “And  to  those  who  shortened.  ”12*  Every 
seven  among  them  shared  one  camel  for  their  sacrifice.  They 
were  one  thousand  and  four  hundred  Companions  and  were 
camping  in  the  area  of  Al-Hudaybiyyah,  outside  the  Sacred 
Area.  It  was  also  reported  that  they  were  within  the 
boundaries  of  the  Sacred  Area.  Allah  knows  best. 

Being  prevented  from  the  House  (Hast)  includes  more  than 
just  being  sick,  fearing  an  enemy  or  getting  lost  on  the  way  to 

111  Ibid. 

121  Muslim  2 :946 . 


542 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathir 


Makkah.  Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  Al-Hajjaj  bin  ‘Amr  Al- 
Ansari  said  that  he  heard  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  saying: 

t  .  t  f  '  ,r . .  *  -  •  ;r  ,  .  ,  f  „  *  . „ 

?J*.J  J*»  -U»  ^  jl  y>* 


'Whoever  suffered  a  broken  bone  or  a  limb,  will  have  ended  his 
Ihrdrn  and  has  to  perform  Hajj  again.' 

He  said,  “I  mentioned  that  to  Ibn  ‘Abbas  and  Abu  Hurayrah 
and  they  both  said,  ‘He  (Al-Hajjaj)  has  said  the  truth’ .’’I'1  This 
Hadith  is  also  reported  in  the  Four  Collections.*2*  In  the 
version  of  Abu  Dawud  and  Ibn  Majah,  the  Prophet  jg  said, 
“Whoever  limped,  had  a  broken  bone  or  became  ill...”131  Ibn 
Abu  Hatim  also  recorded  it  and  said,  “It  was  reported  that  Ibn 
Mas *ud,  Ibn  Az-Zubayr,  ‘Alqamah,  Said  bin  Musayyib,  ‘Urwah 
bin  Az-Zubayr,  Mujahid,  An-Nakhal,  ‘Ata’  and  Muqatil  bin 
Hayyan  said  that  being  prevented  ( Hast)  entails  an  enemy,  an 
illness  or  a  fracture.’^4*  Ath-Thawri  also  said,  “Being  prevented 
entails  everything  that  harms  the  person.”*51 
It  is  reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  ‘A’ishah  said  that 
Allah’s  Messenger  jg  went  to  Duba'ah  bint  Az-Zubayr  bin 
‘Abdul-Muttalib  who  said,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah!  I  intend  to 
perform  Hajj  but  I  am  ill.”  He  said,  “Perform  Hajj  and  make  the 
condition:  *My  place  is  where  You  prevent  (or  halt)  me.”*61 
Muslim  recorded  similarly  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas.*7*  So  saying  such  a 
condition  for  Hajj  is  allowed  is  based  on  this  Hadith. 

Allah’s  statement:  . 


i . .  .sacrifice  a  Hady  such  as  you  can  afford) 

includes  a  sheep  also,  as  Imam  Malik  reported  that  ‘Ali  bin 
Abu  Talib  used  to  say.*8*  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “The  Hady  includes 
eight  types  of  animals:  camels,  cows,  goats  and  sheep.”*9* 

11  *  Ahmad  3 :450. 

*2*  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  4 :8,  and  An-Nasa’i  5 : 198 . 

*3*  Abu  DAwud  2:434,  and  Ibn  Majah  2 : 1028. 

*4'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :444-445. 

*5'  Ibid. 

*6'  Fath  Al-Bari  9 :34 . 

*7*  Muslim  2  :868 . 

*8'  Al-Muwatta’  1  :385. 

*9*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1  :450 . 


‘Abdur-Razzaq  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  about  what  Allah 
said:. 

4 . .  .sacrifice  a  Hady  such  as  you  can  afford } 

“As  much  as  one  could  afford.”111  Al-‘Awfi  said  that  Ibn 
‘AbbSs  said,  “If  one  can  afford  it,  then  camels,  otherwise  cows, 
or  sheep.”121  Hisham  bin  *Urwah  quoted  his  father: 

v... 

4 ..  .sacrifice  a  Hady  (animal,  i.e.,  a  sheep,  a  cow,  or  a  camel) 
such  as  you  can  afford} 

‘Depending  on  the  price.  ’•3| 

The  proof  that  sacrificing  only  a  sheep  is  allowed  in  the  case 
of  being  prevented  from  continuing  the  rites,  is  that  Allah  has 
required  sacrificing  whatever  is  available  as  a  Hady,  and  the 
Hady  is  any  type  of  cattle;  be  it  camels,  cows  or  sheep.  This  is 
the  opinion  of  Ibn  ‘Abbas  the  cousin  of  Allah’s  Messenger  j^| 
and  the  scholar  of  Tafsir.  It  is  reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that 
‘A’ishah,  the  Mother  of  the  believers,  said,  “The  Prophet  jg  once 
offered  some  sheep  as  Hady .”141 
Allah’s  statement: 

4'U  Si*  %  £  &&  \&  %} 

4.. . and  do  not  shave  your  heads  until  the  Hady  reaches  the 
place  of  sacrifice.} 

is  a  continuation  of  His  statement: 

<A  jpfj  \$>} 

4And  complete,  the  Hajj  and  'Umrah  for  Allah.} 
and  is  not  dependent  upon: 

4But  if  you  are  prevented,  then  sacrifice  a  Hady} 

111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :451 . 

121  At-Tabari  4:30. 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  1 :452 

141  Fath  Al-Bari  3 :639  and  Muslim  2 :958 . 


544 


Tafsir  Ibti  Kathir 


as  Ibn  Jarir  has  erroneously  claimed.  When  the  Prophet  s*; 
and  his  Companions  were  prevented  from  entering  the  Sacred 
House  during  the  Al-Hudaybiyyah  year  by  the  polytheists  from 
Quraysh,  they  shaved  their  heads  and  sacrificed  their  Hady 
outside  the  Haram  (Sacred)  area.  In  normal  circumstances,  and 
when  one  can  safely  reach  the  House,  he  is  not  allowed  to 
shave  his  head  until: 


4fe  lili' 

4... and  do  not  shave  your  heads  until  the  Hady  reaches  the 
place  of  sacrifice 


and  then  he  ends  the  rituals  of  Hajj  or  'Umrah,  or  both  if  he 
had  assumed  Ihram  for  both.  It  is  recorded  in  the  Two  Sahihs 
that  Hafsah  said,  “O  Allah’s  Messenger!  What  is  wrong  with 
the  people,  they  have  finished  their  Ihram  for  'Umrah  but  you 
have  not?”  The  Prophet  jg  said, 


ojJjj 


«/  matted  my  hair  and  I  have  garlanded  my  Hady  (animals  for 
sacrifice),  so  /  will  not  finish  my  Hiram  till  I  offer  the 
sacrifice  yi* 


Whoever  shaved  his  Head  during  Ihram,  will  have  to  pay 
the  Fidyah 

Allah  said: 


4 And  whosoever  of  you  is  ill  or  has  an  ailment  on  his  scalp 
(necessitating  shaving),  he  must  pay  a  Fidyah. > 

Al-Bukhari  reported  that  ‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Asbahani  said 
that  he  heard  ‘Abdullah  bin  Ma'qil  saying  that  he  sat  with 
Ka*b  bin  TJjrah  in  the  mosque  of  Kufah  (in  Iraq).  He  then 
asked  him  about  the  Fidyah  of  the  fasting.  Ka*b  said,  “This 
was  revealed  concerning  my  case  especially,  but  it  is  also  for 
you  in  general.  I  was  carried  to  Allah’s  Messenger  2^  and  the 
lice  were  falling  in  great  numbers  on  my  face.  The  Prophet  jg 
said: 


m 


Path  Al-Bari  3 :493  and  Muslim  2 :902 . 


545 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200 )  fParf-2) 


N  i  cJL*  j&v  t«l  i  IJu  uLl  jt  H 


«/  never  thought  that  your  ailment  (or  struggle)  had  reached  to 
such  an  extent  as  I  see.  Can  you  afford  a  sheep  (for  sacrifice)?'  I 
replied  in  the  negative .» 

He  then  said: 


A  jkl  CjSLS  'L.  j\  fd  m 

'  ijiif;  jlio 


"Fast  ybr  //iree  days  or  /eed  s/a:  poor  persons,  each  with  half  a 
Sa'  of  food  (1  Sa'  =  3  kilograms  approx.)  and  shave  your  head .» 

So  this  is  a  general  judgement  derived  from  a  specific  case.1 11 
Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Ka*b  bin  TJjrah  said,  “Allah’s 
Messenger  jfe  came  by  while  I  was  igniting  the  fire  under  a  pot 
and  while  the  lice  were  falling  down  my  head  or  my  eyelids.  He 
said: 

‘y>  :  i-ii  JlAjjD 


“Do  these  lice  in  your  head  bother  you?» 
I  said,  ‘Yes.’  He  said: 


j\  i  i  J  i  ^  j  iAaU'UI 


* Shave  it,  then  fast  three  days,  or  feed  six  poor  people,  or 
sacrifice  an  animal . » 


Ayyub  (one  of  the  narrators  of  the  Hadith)  commented,  “I  do 
not  know  which  alternative  was  stated  first.  ”,2)  The  wording  of 
the  Qur’an  begins  with  the  easiest  then  the  more  difficult 
options:  “Pay  a  Fidyah  of  fasting  (three  days),  feeding  (six  poor 
persons)  or  sacrificing  (an  animal).”  Meanwhile,  the  Prophet  $g£ 
advised  Ka*b  with  the  more  rewarding  option  first,  that  is, 
sacrificing  a  sheep,  then  feeding  six  poor  persons,  then  fasting 
three  days.  Each  Text  is  suitable  in  its  place  and  context,  all 
the  thanks  and  praises  are  due  to  Allah. 


Tamattu ‘  during  Hajj 

Allah  said: 


111  Fath  Al-B&ri  8:34. 
Ahmad  4 :241 . 


546 


Tgfsir  [bn  Kaffir 


U  'J&  0  g<  Jl  g2  £  jSLjl  1S£> 

{Then  if  you  are  in  safety  and  whosoever  performs  the  'Umrah 
(in  the  months  of  Hajj),  before  (performing)  the  Hajj,  he  must 
slaughter  a  Hady  such  as  he  can  afford 

That  is,  when  you  are  able  to  complete  the  rites,  so  whoever 
among  you  connects  his  ‘ Umrah  with  Hajj  having  the  same 
Ihram  for  both,  or,  first  assuming  Ihram  for  ‘Umrah,  and  then 
assuming  Ihram  for  Hajj  when  finished  the  ‘Umrah,  this  is  the 
more  specific  type  of  Tamattu'  which  is  well-known  among  the 
discussion  of  the  scholars  whereas  in  general  there  are  two 
types  of  Tamattu as  the  authentic  Hadiths  prove,  since 
among  the  narrators  are  those  who  said,  "Allah’s  Messenger  jg 
performed  Tamattu',  and  others  who  said,  " Qarin "  but  there  is 
no  difference  between  them  over  the  Hady. 

So  Allah  said, 


G  gi  4  p  2  p\  r# 


iThen  if  you  are  in  safety  and  whosoever  performs  the  ' Umrah 
(in  the  months  of  Hajj),  before  (performing)  the  Hajj  (i.e.,  Hajj 
At-Tamattu'  and  Al-Qirdn),  he  must  slaughter  a  Hady  such  as 
he  can  afford 

means  let  him  sacrifice  whatever  Hady  is  available  to  him,  the 
least  of  which  is  a  sheep.  One  is  also  allowed  to  sacrifice  a 
cow  because  the  Prophet  jg  slaughtered  cows  on  behalf  of  his 
wives.  Al-Awzal  reported  that  Abu  Hurayrah  narrated  that 
Allah’s  Messenger  jg  slaughtered  cows  on  behalf  of  his  wives 
when  they  were  performing  Tamattu4. ,l*  This  was  reported  by 
Abu  Bakr  bin  Marduwyah. 

This  last  Hadith  proves  that  Tamattu'  is  legislated.  It  is 
reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  Imran  bin  Husayn  said,  “We 
performed  Hajj  At-Tamattu'  in  the  lifetime  of  Allah’s  Messenger 
Sg  and  then  the  Qur’an  was  revealed  (regarding  Hajj  At- 
Tamattu).  Nothing  was  revealed  to  forbid  it,  nor  did  he  (the 
Prophet  sg)  forbid  it  until  he  died.  And  somebody  said  what  he 
wished  (regarding  Hajj  At-Tamattu *)  according  to  his  own 
opinion. ”'2*  Al-Bukhari  said  that  Imran  was  talking  about 

111  Abu  Dfiwud  2:362. 

121  Fath  Al-B&ri  8 :  34  and  Muslim  2 :900. 


547 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 

Umar. 

It  is  reported  in  an  authentic  narration  that  Umar  used  to 
discourage  the  people  from  performing  Tamattu \  He  used  to 
say,  “If  we  refer  to  Allah’s  Book,  we  should  complete  it,” 
meaning: 

u  a  git  j,  p 

4 ..  .whosoever  performs  the  'Umrdh  (in  the  months  of  Hajj), 
before  ( performing j  the  Hajj,  he  must  slaughter  a  Hady  such  as 
he  can  afford,  $ 

However  ‘Umar  did  not  say  that  Tamattu'  is  unlawful.  He 
only  prevented  them  so  that  the  people  would  increase  their 
trips  to  the  House  for  Hajj  (during  the  months  of  Hajj)  and 
Vmrah  (throughout  the  year),  as  he  himself  has  stated. 


Whoever  performs  Tamattu *  should  fast  Ten  Days  if  He 
does  not  have  a  Hady 

Allah  said: 


4  •■■but  if  he  cannot  (afford  it),  he  should  fast  three  days  during 
the  Hajj  and  seven  days  after  his  return  (to  his  home),  making 
ten  days  in  all.} 

This  Ayah  means:  “Those  who  do  not  find  a  Hady,  let  them 
fast  three  days  during  the  Hajj  season.”  Al-‘Awfi  said  that  Ibn 
‘Abbas  said,  “If  one  does  not  have  a  Hady,  he  should  fast 
three  days  during  Hajj,  before  'Arafah  day.  If  the  day  of 
‘Arafah  was  the  third  day,  then  his  fast  is  complete.  He  should 
also  fast  seven  days  when  he  gets  back  home.”1  '•  Abu  Ishaq 
reported  from  Wabarah  from  Ibn  Umar  who  said,  “One  fasts 
one  day  before  the  day  of  Tarwiyah,  the  day  of  Tarwiyah 
(eighth  day  of  Dhul-Hijjah)  and  then  ‘Arafah  day  (the  ninth 
day  of  the  month  of  Dhul-Hijjah).”121  The  same  statement  was 
reported  by  Ja'far  bin  Muhammad  from  his  father  from  ‘Ali.131 

If  one  did  not  fast  these  three  days  or  at  least  some  of  them 
before  ‘Id  day  (the  tenth  day  of  Dhul-Hijjah),  he  is  allowed  to 


111  At-Tabari  4  :97 . 
121  At-Tabari  4  :95 . 
131  At-Tabari  4  :94 . 


548 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlur 

fast  during  the  Tashriq  days  (11- 12- 13th  day  of  Dhul-Hijjah). 
‘A’ishah  and  Ibn  ‘Umar  said,  “Fasting  the  days  of  Tashriq  was 
only  allowed  for  those  who  did  not  find  the  Hady,”  as  Al- 
Bukhari  has  reported.  Sufyan  related  that  Ja'far  bin 
Muljammad  narrated  that  his  father  said  that  ‘Ali  said, 
“Whoever  did  not  fast  the  three  days  during  the  Hajj,  should 
fast  them  during  the  days  of  Tashriq."  This  is  also  the  position 
taken  by  TJbayd  bin  Umayr  Al-Laythi,  Ikrimah,  Al-Hasan  Al- 
Basri  and  *Urwah  bin  Az-Zubayr,111  referring  to  the  general 
meaning  of  Allah’s  statement: 

4  $ 

4 . . .fast  three  days  during  the  Hajj ...} 

As  for  what  Muslim  reported  that  Qutaybah  Al-Hudhali  said 
that  Allah’s  Messenger  ^  said: 

>  4.1  fYj  jsrt  fd  Jijlii  fd» 

‘The  days  of  Tashriq  are  days  of  eating  and  drinking  and 
remembering  Allah  the  Exalted. b,2) 

This  narration  is  general  in  meaning  while  what  ‘A’ishah  and 
Ibn  ‘Umar  narrated  is  specific. 

Allah  said: 


4 . . .and  seven  days  after  his  return.} 

There  are  two  opinions  regarding  the  meaning  of  this  Ayah. 
First,  it  means  “when  you  return  to  the  camping  areas’.  The 
second,  upon  going  back  home.  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  reported  that 
Salim  narrated  that  he  heard  Ibn  Umar  saying: 

4f%-j  'H  gtf  4  $ 

"4 ...but  if  he  cannot  (afford  it),  he  should  fast  three  days 
during  the  Hajj  and  seven  days  after  his  return ,} 

means  when  he  goes  back  to  his  family.  ”*31  The  same  opinion 
was  reported  from  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Mujahid, 
‘Ata’,  ‘Ikrimah,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Imam  Az-Zuhri  and  Ar- 

111  At-Tabari  4:98-99. 

121  Muslim  2:800. 

*3'  Tafsir  'Abdur-Razzaq  1 :76. 


549 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 


Rabl‘  bin  Anas.11’ 

Al-Bukhari  reported  that  Salim  bin  ‘Abdullah  narrated  that 
Ibn  *Umar  said,  “During  the  Farewell  Hajj  of  Allah’s  Messenger 
he  performed  Tamattu'  with  ‘Umrah  and  Hajj.  He  drove  a 
Hady  along  with  him  from  Dhul-Hulayfah.  Allah’s  Messenger  jg 
started  by  assuming  Ihram  for  ‘Umrah,  and  then  for  Hajj.  And 
the  people,  too,  performed  the  ‘Umrah  and  Hajj  along  with  the 
Prophet  jg.  Some  of  them  brought  the  Hady  and  drove  it  along 
with  them,  while  the  others  did  not.  So,  when  the  Prophet  jg 
arrived  at  Makkah,  he  said  to  the  people: 


•t  •"  '  .  !/  C  -  >•  '  \  •  *1  -  VI  I  *  X* 

r5  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

^  P  ’pSl*  Ifi 

grj  1M  m  p^  ijii  V.  p  -fii  igiit 


‘Whoever  among  you  has  driven  the  Hady,  should  not  finish 
his  Ihram  till  he  completes  his  Hajj.  And  whoever  among  you 
has  not  (driven)  the  Hady  with  him,  he  should  perform  Tawdf 
of  the  Ka'bah  and  between  As-Safa  and  Al-Marwah.  Then,  he 
should  shave  or  cut  his  hair  short  and  finish  his  Ihram,  and 
should  later  assume  Ihram  for  Hajj;  [but  he  must  offer  a  Hady 
(sacrifice)].  And  if  anyone  cannot  afford  a  Hady,  he  should  fast 
for  three  days  during  the  Hajj  and  seven  days  when  he  returns 
home.* 

He  then  mentioned  the  rest  of  the  Hadith,  which  is  reported 
in  the  Two  Saht?is.*2* 

Allah  said: 

4... making  ten  days  in  all.$ 

to  emphasize  the  ruling  we  mentioned  above.  This  method  is 
common  in  the  Arabic  language,  for  they  would  say,  1  have 
seen  with  my  eyes,  heard  with  my  ears  and  written  with  my 
hand,’  to  emphasize  such  facts.  Similarly,  Allah  said: 

■£» 

111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2:498. 

'2*  Fath  Al-Bari  3 :630  and  Muslim  2 :901 


550 


Tafsfr  ton  Katitir 


4 . .  .nor  a  bird  that  flies  with  its  two  wings »  (6:38)  and: 


4 


4... nor  did  you  write  any  book  (whatsoever)  with  your  right 
hand}  (29:48)  and: 


•  ✓  >  £  {^-f  •  / 


.  > 


4And  We  appointed  for  Musa  thirty  nights  and  added  (to  the  period) 
ten  (more),  and  he  completed  the  tenn,  appointed  by  his  Lord,  of  forty 
nights .}  (7:142) 

It  was  also  said  that  the  meaning  of  “ten  days  in  all” 
emphasizes  the  order  to  fast  for  ten  days,  not  less  than  that. 


The  Residents  of  Makkah  do  not  perform  Tamattu * 

Allah  said: 

iThis  is  for  him  whose  family  is  not  present  at  Al-Masjid  Al- 
Hardm  (i.e.,  twn-resident  of  Makkah).} 

This  Ayah  concerns  the  residents  of  the  area  of  the  Haram,  for 
they  do  not  perform  Tamattu'.  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  reported  that 
Tawus  said,  “ Tamattu '  is  for  the  people,  those  whose  families 
are  not  residing  in  the  Haram  area  (Makkah),  not  for  the 
residents  of  Makkah.  Hence  Allah’s  Statement: 

4ffl^  jW  Cri 

iThis  is  for  him  whose  family  is  not  present  at  Al-Masjid  Al-Hardm 
(i.e.,  non-resident  of  Makkah) .} 

‘Abdur-Razzaq  then  said,  “I  was  also  told  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
said  similar  to  TawAs.”111  Allah  said: 

4&  \f£(,} 

4... and  fear  Allah}  meaning,  in  what  He  has  commanded  you 
and  what  He  prohibited  for  you.  He  then  said: 

4^fj\  jyS  $  y  '$&} 

4... and  knoiv  that  Allah  is  severe  in  punishment} 

m 


At-Tabari  4:111. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 


551 


Jr 


wm  n  «u 

s... 


for  those  who  defy 
His  command  and 
commit  what  He  has 
prohibited. 

a  £#2 

Vj  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

@®J'  4  Yj 

5?f  ~  .  r  V  •- 

4JJI  JA  .tfT 

i  JiU 

<197.  77ie  Hajj 
(pilgrimage)  is  (in)  the 
well-known  months.  So 
whosoever  intends  to 
perform  Hajj  therein  (by 
assuming  Hiram),  then 
he  should  not  have  sex¬ 
ual  relations  (with  his 
wife),  nor  commit  sin, 
nor  dispute  unjustly 
during  the  Hajj.  And 
whatever  good  you  do, 
Allah  knows  it.  And  take  provisions  for  the  journey,  but  the  best 
provision  is  At-Taqwd  (piety,  righteousness).  So  fear  Me,  O  men  of 
understanding !} 


*A**j 

jsJSj 

J43  0 


When  does  Ihram  for  Hajj  start 

Allah  said: 


$The  Hajj  is  (in)  the  well-known  months.} 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  Ihram  for  Hajj  only  occurs  during 
the  months  of  Hajj.  This  was  reported  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas,111 
Jabir,  ‘Ata’,  Tawus  and  Mujahid.  The  proof  for  this  is  Allah’s 


IM 


At-Tabari  4:115. 


552 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

statement  that  Hajj  occurs  during  known,  specific  months, 
which  indicates  that  Hajj  is  not  allowed  before  that,  just  as  the 
prayer  has  a  fixed  time  (before  which  one’s  prayer  is  not 
accepted). 

Ash-Shafil  recorded  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “No  person  should 
assume  Ihram  for  Hajj  before  the  months  of  the  Hajj,  for  Allah 
said: 


iThe  Hajj  is  (in)  the  well-knmvn  months .^*11 

Ibn  Khuzaymah  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “No  Ihram  for 
Hajj  should  be  assumed,  except  during  the  months  of  Hajj ,*2* 
for  among  the  Sunnah  of  Hajj  is  that  one  assume  Ihram  for  it 
during  the  Hajj  months.”  This  is  an  authentic  narration  and 
the  Companion’s  statement  that  such  and  such  is  among  the 
Sunnah  is  considered  as  a  Hadith  of  the  Prophet  jg,  according 
to  the  majority  of  the  scholars.  This  is  especially  the  case  when 
it  is  Ibn  ‘Abbas  who  issued  this  statement,  as  he  is  the 
Taijuman  (translator,  interpreter,  explainer)  of  the  Qur’an. 

There  is  a  Hadith  about  this  subject  too.  Ibn  Marduwyah 
related  that  Jabir  narrated  that  the  Prophet  jg  said: 

£\  J  V[  ^  ^  l\  ^  * 

«No  one  should  assume  Ihram  far  Hajj,  but  during  the  months 
of  Hajj. 

The  chain  of  narrators  for  this  Hadith  is  reasonable.  Ash- 
Shafi!  and  Al-Bayhaqi  recorded  this  Hadith  from  Ibn  Jurayj 
who  related  that  Abu  Az-Zubayr  said  that  he  heard  Jabir  bin 
Abdullah  being  asked,  “Does  one  assume  Ihram  for  Hajj  before 
the  months  of  the  Hajj?”  He  said,  “No/**1  This  narration  is 
more  reliable  than  the  narration  that  we  mentioned  from  the 
Prophet  sg.  In  short,  this  statement  is  the  opinion  of  the 
Companion,  supported  by  Ibn  Abbas'  statement  that  it  is  a 
part  of  the  Sunnah  not  to  assume  Ihram  for  Hajj  before  the 


111  Al-Umm  2:132. 

^  Ibn  Khuzaymah  4  : 162 . 

Al-Musannaf  Ibn  Abi  Shay  bah ,  and  Tafsir  ‘Abdur-Razzdq. 
^  Al-Umm  2  : 132 ,  and  Al-Bayhaqi  4 :343 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2 
months  of  the  Hajj.  Allah  knows  best. 


553 


The  Months  of  Hajj 

Allah  said: 


4... the  well-known  months .} 

Al-Bukhari  said  that  Ibn  ‘Umar  said  that  these  are  Shawwal, 
Dhul-Qa‘dah  and  the  first  ten  days  of  Dhul-Hijjah.111  This 
narration  for  which  Al-Bukhari  did  not  mention  the  chain  of 
narrators,  was  collected  by  a  continuous  chain  of  narrators 
that  Ibn  Jarir  rendered  authentic,  leading  to  Ibn  ‘Umar,  who 
said: 


4The  Hajj  (pilgrimage)  is  (in)  the  well-known  (lunar  year) 
months. $ 

“which  are  Shawwal,  Dhul-Qa‘dah  and  the  (first)  ten  days  of 
Dhul-Hijjah.”121  Its  chain  is  Sahih.  Al-Hakim  also  recorded  it 
in  his  Mustadrak,  and  he  said,"It  meets  the  criteria  of  the  Two 
Shaykhs."^3' 

This  statement  is  also  reported  from  ‘Umar,  ‘Ali,  Ibn  Mas'ud, 
‘Abdullah  bin  Az-Zubayr,  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  ‘Ata’,  Tawus,  Mujahid, 
Ibrahim  An-Nakhal,  Imam  Ash-Sha'bi,  Al-Hasan,  Ibn  Sirin, 
Makhul,  Qatadah,  Ad-Dahhak  bin  Muzahim,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas 
and  Muqatil  bin  HayyanJ41  This  opinion  was  preferred  by  Ibn 
Jarir  who  said,  “It  is  a  common  practice  to  call  two  months 
and  a  part  of  the  third  month  as  ‘months’.  This  is  similar  to 
the  Arab’s  saying,  1  visited  such  and  such  person  this  year  or 
this  day.’  He  only  visited  him  during  a  part  of  the  year  and  a 
part  of  the  day.  Allah  said: 

Pi  A 

4But  whosoever  hastens  to  leave  in  two  days,  there  is  no  sin  on 
him.} 

111  Fath  Al-Bari  3 :490 . 

121  At-Tabari  4:116. 

131  Al-Hakim  2:276. 

I4*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2  :486-488 . 


554 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 

In  this  case,  one  will  only  be  hastening  for  one  and  a  half 
days.” 

Allah  then  said: 

4(2*  Zj  <£} 

iSo  whosoever  intends  (Farada)  to  perform  Hajj  therein  (by 
assuming  Ihrdm ),} 

meaning  that  one’s  assuming  the  Ihrdm  requires  a  Hajj,  for 
the  person  is  required  to  complete  the  rituals  of  Hajj  after 
assuming  Ifyrdm.  Ibn  Jarir  said  that  Al-’Awfi  said,  “The 
scholars  agree  that  ( Farada )  ‘intends’  mentioned  in  the  Ayah 
means  it  is  a  requirement  and  an  obligation.”1 11  'Ali  bin  Abu 
Talhah  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said: 

4So  whosoever  intends  to  perform  Hajj  therein  (by  assuming 
Ihrdm),} 

refers  to  those  who  assume  Ihrdm  for  Hajj  and  ‘Umrah”.  ‘Ata’ 
said,  “’Intends’,  means,  assumes  the  Ihrdm."  Similar 
statements  were  attributed  to  Ibrahim,  Ad-Dahhak  and 
others.121 

Prohibition  of  Rafath  (Sexual  Intercourse)  during  Hajj 

Allah  said: 


4He  should  not  have  Rafath } 

This  Ayah  means  that  those  who  assume  the  Ihrdm  for  Hajj 
or  ‘Umrah  are  required  to  avoid  the  Rafath,  meaning,  sexual 
intercourse.  Allah’s  statement  here  is  similar  to  His  statement: 

33  &} 

4It  is  made  lawful  for  you  to  have  Rafath  (sexual  relations)  with 
your  wives  on  the  night  of  the  fast.}  (2:187) 

Whatever  might  lead  to  sexual  intercourse,  such  as 
embracing,  kissing  and  talking  to  women  about  similar 


111  At-Tabari  4:120-121. 
121  AMabari  4: 123. 


555 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqara)i  (175  -  200)  ( Part2 ) 

subjects,  is  not  allowed.  Ibn  Jarir  reported  that  Nafi‘  narrated 
that  ‘Abdullah  bin  ‘Umar  said,  “ Rafath  means  sexual 
intercourse  or  mentioning  this  subject  with  the  tongue,  by 
either  men  or  women.”111  ‘Ala’  bin  Abu  Rabah  said  that  Rafath 
means  sexual  intercourse  and  foul  speech.121  This  is  also  the 
opinion  of  ‘Amr  bin  Dinar.  ‘Ata’  also  said  that  they  used  to 
even  prevent  talking  (or  hinting)  about  this  subject.131  Tawfls 
said  that  Rafath  includes  one’s  saying,  “When  I  end  the  Ihram 
I  will  have  sex  with  you.”141  This  is  also  the  same  explanation 
offered  by  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  regarding  Rafath .  ‘Ali  bin  Abu  Talhah 
said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “ Rafath  means  having  sex  with  the 
wife,  kissing,  fondling  and  saying  foul  words  to  her,  and 
similar  acts.”  151  Ibn  ‘Abbas  and  Ibn  ‘Umar  said  that  Rafath 
means  to  have  sex  with  women.161  This  is  also  the  opinion  of 
Said  bin  Jubayr,  Ikrimah,  Mujahid,  Ibrahim  An-NakhaT,  Abu 
Al-‘Aliyah  who  narrated  it  from  ‘Ata’  and  MakhUl,  ‘Ata  Al- 
Khurasani,  ‘Ata’  bin  Yasar,  ‘Atiyah,  Ibrahim,  Ar-RabT,  Az- 
Zuhri,  As-Suddi,  Malik  bin  Anas,  Muqatil  bin  Hayyfin,  ‘Abdul- 
Karim  bin  Malik,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah  and  Ad-Dahhak,  and 
others. 

The  Prohibition  of  Fusuq  during  Hajj 

Allah  said: 

4... nor  commit  sin}  Miqsam  and  several  other  scholars  related 
that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  "It  is  disobedience."  This  is  also  the 
opinion  of  ‘Ata,’  Mujahid,  Tawus,  ‘Ikrimah,  Said  bin  Jubayr, 
Muhammad  bin  Ka*b,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Ibrahim  An-Nakhal, 
Az-Zuhri,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas,  ‘Ata’  bin  Yasar,  ‘Ata’  Al-Khurasani 
and  Muqatil  bin  Hayy&n.171 

Ibn  Wahb  reported  that  Nafi‘  narrated  that  ‘Abdullah  bin 

111  At-Tabari  4:126. 

121  At-Tabari  4:127. 

131  At-Tabari  4:128. 

141  Ibid. 

151  Al-Tabari  4:129. 

161  Ibid. 

m  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :497-500. 


556 


Tafsir  Ibn  KaOur 


Umar  said,  “Fusuq  [or  sin  mentioned  in  the  Ayah  (2:197)] 
refers  to  committing  what  Allah  has  forbidden  in  the  Sacred 
Area.”11' 


Several  others  said  that  FusHq  means  cursing  others,  they 
based  this  on  the  authentic  Hadith: 


Jis;  jji j  ,4^1 4>c,» 


« Cursing  the  Muslim  is  Fusuq,  while  fighting  him  is  Kufr.d2* 

‘Abdur- Rahman  bin  Zayd  bin  Aslam  said  Fusuq  here  means 
slaughtering  animals  for  the  idols,  as  Allah  said: 


$  Jik  &  jty 


4-.. or  impious  (Fisq)  meat  (of  an  animal)  which  is  slaughtered 
as  a  sacrifice  for  others  than  Allah  .}  (6:145) 

Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Fusuq  is  insulting  one  another  with 
bad  nicknames. 

Those  who  said  that  the  Fusuq  means  all  types  of 
disobedience  are  correct.  Allah  has  also  prohibited  committing 
injustice  during  the  months  of  Hajj  in  specific,  although 
injustice  is  prohibited  throughout  the  year.  This  is  why  Allah 
said: 


4...0/  them  four  are  sacred.  That  is  the  right  religion,  so  wrong 
not  yourselves  therein. $  (9:36) 

Allah  said  about  the  Sacred  Area: 


i...and  whoever  inclines  to  evil  actions  therein  or  to  do  wrong, 
him  We  shall  cause  to  taste  from  a  painful  torment.}  (22:25) 


It  is  recorded  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  Abu  Hurayrah  narrated 
that  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said: 


*JjJ J  A li& 


“Whoever  performed  Hajj  to  this  (Sacred)  House  and  did  not 
commit  Rafath  or  Fusuq,  will  return  sinless,  just  as  the  day  his 


m  Ibn  AbiHatim  2:497. 
121  Fath  Al-Bari  1 :135. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 
mother  gave  birth  to  him.^ 


557 


The  Prohibition  of  arguing  during  Hajj 

Allah  said: 

4  fo*  •?;> 

4«or  should  there  be  Jidal  during  Hajj > 

meaning,  disputes  and  arguments.  Ibn  Jarir  related  that 
‘Abdullah  bin  Mas*Od  said  that  what  Allah  said: 

4  "3j} 

4 . .  .nor  dispute  unjustly  during  the  Hajj.} 

means  to  argue  with  your  companion  (or  fellow)  until  you 
make  him  angry.  This  is  similar  to  the  the  opinion  that 
Miqsam  and  Ad-Dahhak  related  to  Ibn  ‘Abbas.121  This  is  also 
the  same  meaning  reported  from  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  ‘Ata’, 
Mujahid,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  ‘Ikrimah,  Jabir  bin  Zayd,  ‘Ata’  Al- 
Khurasani,  Makhul,  As-Suddi,  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan,  ‘Amr  bin 
Dinar,  Ad-Dahhak,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas,  Ibrahim  An-Nakhal, 
‘Ata  bin  Yasar,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah  and  Az-Zuhri.131 

The  Encouragement  for  Righteous  Deeds  and  to  bring 
Provisions  for  Hajj 

Allah  said: 

jjj-  ijUJu 

4And  whatever  good  you  do,  Allah  knows  it.} 

After  Allah  prohibited  evil  in  deed  and  tongue,  He 
encouraged  righteous,  good  deeds,  stating  that  He  is 
knowledgeable  of  the  good  that  they  do,  and  He  will  reward 
them  with  the  best  awards  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection. 

Allah  said  next: 

4U&  0  £  4# 

4 Ami  take  provisions  (ivith  you)  for  the  journey,  but  the  best 

111  Fath  Al-Bari  4 :25  and  Muslim  2 :983 . 

121  At-Tabari  4:141. 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :503-505 : 


558 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


provision  is  At-Taqioa  (piety,  righteousness ).} 

Al-Bukhari  and  Abu  Dawud  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said, 
“The  people  of  Yemen  used  to  go  to  Hajj  without  taking 
enough  supplies  with  them.  They  used  to  say,  We  are  those 
who  have  Tawakkul  (reliance  on  Allah).’  Allah  revealed  this 
Ayah : 


iAnd  take  provisions  (with  you)  for  the  journey,  but  the  best 
provision  is  At-Taqioa  (piety,  righteousness)  .}^]^ 

Ibn  Jarir  and  Ibn  Marduwyah  narrated  that  Ibn  TJmar  said, 
“When  people  assumed  Ihiram,  they  would  throw  away 
whatever  provisions  they  had  and  would  acquire  other  types  of 
provisions.  Allah  revealed: 

4And  take  a  provisions  (ivitli  you)  for  the  journey,  but  the  best 
provision  is  At-Taqiod  (piety,  righteousness).} 

Allah  forbade  them  from  this  practice  and  required  them  to 
take  flour  and  Sawiq  (a  type  of  food  usually  eaten  with  dates) 
with  them.”121 


The  Provisions  of  the  Hereafter 

Allah  said: 

iisjti  0  £  dJ{>} 


4... but  the  best  provision  is  At-Taqwd  (piety,  righteousness).} 

When  Allah  required  mankind  to  supply  themselves  with  what 
sustains  them  for  the  journeys  of  this  life,  He  directed  them  to 
the  necessary  provisions  for  the  Hereafter:  Taqwa.  Allah  said 
in  another  Ayah : 


4-. .and  as  an  adornment;  and  the  raiment  of  Taqwa,  that  is 
better.}  (7:26) 

Allah  mentioned  the  material  covering  and  then  He 


111  Fath  Al-B&ri  3 :449 ,  Abu  D&wud  2 :309. 
121  At-Tabari  4:156. 


559 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Portal 


mentioned  the  spiritual  covering,  which  includes  humbleness, 
obedience  and  Taqwa.  He  also  stated  that  the  latter  provision 
is  better  and  more  beneficial  than  the  former. 

Jjti 


iSo  fear  Me,  O  men  of  understanding !} 

meaning:  “Fear  My  torment,  punishment,  and  affliction  for 
those  who  defy  Me  and  do  not  adhere  to  My  commands,  O 
people  of  reason  and  understanding.’ 


4198.  There  is  no  sin  on  you  if  you  seek  the  bounty  of  your 
Lord  (during  pilgrimage  by  trading).  Then  when  you  leave 
'Arafat,  remember  Allah  (by  glorifying  His  praises,  i.e., 
prayers  and  invocations)  at  the  Mash'ar-il-Hardm.  And 
remember  Him  (by  invoking  Allah  for  all  good)  as  He  has 
guided  you,  and  verily  you  were  before,  of  those  who  were 
astray}. 


Commercial  Transactions  during  Hajj 

Al-Bukhari  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Ukaz,  Mijannah 
and  Dhul-Majaz  were  trading  posts  during  the  time  of 
JahUiyyah.  During  that  era,  they  did  not  like  the  idea  of 
conducting  business  transactions  during  the  Hajj  season. 
Later,  this  Ayah  was  revealed: 


A 


iThere  is  no  sin  on  you  if  you  seek  the  bounty  of  your  Lord.} 
during  the  Hajj  season.”111 

Abu  Dawud  and  others  recorded  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “They 
used  to  avoid  conducting  business  transactions  during  the 
Hajj  season,  saying  that  these  are  the  days  of  Dhikr.  Allah 
revealed: 


(i) 


iyt  p lx.  ^*l} 


Fath  Al-Bari  8 :34 . 


560 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


iThere  is  no  sin  on  you  if  you  seek  the  bounty  of  your  Lord 
(during  pilgrimage  by  trading).}^ 

This  is  also  the  explanation  of  Mujahid,  Said  bin  Jubayr, 
‘Ikrimah,  Mansur  bin  Al-Mu'tamir,  Qatadah,  Ibrahim  An- 
Nakhal,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  and  others.  Ibn  Jarir  reported  that 
Abu  Umaymah  said  that  when  Ibn  TJmar  was  asked  about 
conducting  trade  during  the  Hajj,  he  recited  the  Ayah: 


ifi  V— of 


iThere  is  no  sin  on  you  if  you  seek  the  bounty  of  your  Lord 
(during  pilgrimage  by  trading) 


This  Hadith  is  related  to  Ibn  ‘Umar  with  a  strong  chain  of 
narrators.  This  Hadith  is  also  related  to  the  Prophet  jg,  as 
Ahmad  reported  that  Abu  Umamah  At-Taymi  said,  “I  asked  Ibn 
Umar,  *We  buy  (and  sell  during  the  Hajj),  so  do  we  still  have  a 
valid  Hajp’  He  said,  ‘Do  you  not  perform  Tawaf  around  the 
House,  stand  at  ‘Arafat,  throw  the  pebbles  and  shave  your 
heads?’  I  said,  ‘Yes.’  Ibn  ‘Umar  said,  ‘A  man  came  to  the 
Prophet  #5  and  asked  him  about  what  you  asked  me,  and  the 
Prophet  jg  did  not  answer  him  until  Jibrll  came  down  with  this 
Ayah: 


%  ». 


iThere  is  no  sin  on  you  if  you  seek  the  bounty  of  your  Lord 
(during  pilgriinage  by  trading).} 

The  Prophet  sg  summoned  the  man  and  said:  “You  are 
pilgrims b.”131  Ibn  Jarir  narrated  that  Abu  Salih  said  to  Umar, 
“O  Leader  of  the  faithful!  Did  you  conduct  trade  transactions 
during  the  Hajp”  He  said,  “Was  their  livelihood  except  during 
Hoy?”141 


Standing  at  ‘Arafat 

Allah  said: 

ite a  s-ZX  U*  'if  ^ 

***  Abu  Dawud  2:350. 

121  At-Jabari  4:165. 

131  Ahmad  2:155. 

141  At-Jabari  4:168. 


561 


Surah  2.  Al-Bagaralt  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 


iThen  when  you  leave  ' Arafat ,  remember  Allah  (by  glorifying 
His  praises,  i.e.,  prayers  and  invocations)  at  the  Ma$h'ar-il- 
Haram.$ 

‘Arafat  is  the  place  where  one  stands  during  the  Hajj  and  it 
is  a  pillar  of  the  rituals  of  Hajj.  Imam  Ahmad  and  the  Sunan 
compilers  recorded  that  ‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Ya'mar  Ad-Diyli 
said  that  he  heard  Allah’s  Messenger  #5  saying: 


i iij  ji  jii  £iL:  of  Jj  gAii* 

.ju  jji  *  >L:  &  (Ji  *  ^  j* 


1  Hajj  is  'Arafat,  (thrice).  Hence,  those  who  have  stood  at 
'Arafat  before  dawn  will  have  performed  ( the  rituals  of  the 
Hajj) .  The  days  of  Mind  are  three,  and  there  is  no  sin  for  those 
who  move  on  after  two  days,  or  for  those  who  stay. s’1* 

The  time  to  stand  on  ‘Arafat  starts  from  noon  on  the  day  of 
‘Arafah  until  dawn  the  next  day,  which  is  the  day  of  the 
Sacrifice  (the  tenth  day  of  Dhul-Hijjah).  The  Prophet  3^  stood 
at  ‘Arafat  during  the  Farewell  Hajj,  after  he  had  offered  the  Zuhr 
(noon)  prayer,  until  sunset.  He  said,  “Learn  your  rituals  from 
me.”12'  In  this  Hadith  (i.e.,  in  the  previous  paragraph)  he  said, 
“Whoever  stood  at  ‘Arafat  before  dawn,  will  have  performed  (the 
rituals  of  Haj}).” 

TJrwah  bin  Mudarris  bin  Harithah  bin  Lam  At-Ta’i  said,  “1 
came  to  Allah’s  Messenger  at  Al-Muzdalifah  when  it  was 
time  to  pray.  I  said,  ‘O  Messenger  of  Allah!  I  came  from  the  two 
mountains  of  Tayy’,  and  my  animal  became  tired  and  I  became 
tired.  I  have  not  left  any  mountain,  but  stood  on  it.  Do  I  have  a 
valid  Hajp'  Allah’s  Messenger  said: 


jS  ^Al)  kil3i  Jj  iiyo  •— sij  oij  k^ijj  llL*  k koAA  j-*1 

*•  -  s  ;  •  " .  c 


a Whoever  performed  this  prayer  with  us,  stood  with  us  until 
we  moved  forth,  and  had  stood  at  ' Arafat  before  that,  day  or 
night,  will  have  performed  the  Hajj  and  completed  its  rituals*  ” 


[1)  Ahmad  4:310,  Abu  Dawud  2:485,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  3:633,  An- 
Nasal  5 :256 ,  and  Ibn  Majah  2 : 1003 . 

Muslim  2 :943 . 


562 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


This  Hadith  was  collected  by  Imam  Ahmad  and  the  compilers 
of  the  Sunan,  and  At-Tirmidhi  graded  it  Sahib.111  It  was 
reported  that  the  mount  was  called  ‘Arafat  because,  as  ‘Abdur- 
Razzaq  reported  that  ‘Ali  bin  Abu  Talib  said,  “Allah  sent  Jibril 
to  Prophet  Ibrahim  and  he  performed  Hajj  for  him  (to  teach 
him  its  rituals).  When  Ibrahim  reached  ‘Arafat  he  said,  1  have 
‘Araftu  (I  know  this  place).’  He  had  come  to  that  area  before. 
Thereafter,  it  was  called  ‘Arafat.”’2’  Ibn  Al-Mubarak  said  that 
‘Ata’  said,  “It  was  called  ‘Arafat  because  Jibrfl  used  to  teach 
Ibrahim  the  rituals  of  Hajj.  Ibrahim  would  say,  1  have  ‘ Araftu, 
I  have  ‘Araftu.’  It  was  thereafter  called  ‘Arafat.”  Similar 
statements  were  attributed  to  Ibn  ‘Abbas13’  ,  Ibn  ‘Umar  and 
Abu  Mijlaz.’4’  Allah  knows  best. 

‘Arafat  is  also  called  Al-Mash‘ar  Al-Haram,  Al-Mash‘ar  Al- 
Aqsa  and  Hal,  while  the  mount  that  is  in  the  middle  of  ‘Arafat 
is  called  Jabal  Ar-Rahmah  (Mount  of  Mercy). 

The  Time  to  leave  'Arafat  and  Al-Muzdalifah 

Ibn  Abu  Hatim  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “During  the 
time  of  Jahiliyyah,  the  people  used  to  stand  at  ‘Arafat.  When 
the  sun  would  be  on  top  of  the  mountains,  just  as  the  turban 
is  on  top  of  a  man’s  head,  they  would  move  on.  Allah’s 
Messenger  delayed  moving  from  ‘Arafat  until  sunset.  ”,s|  Ibn 
Marduwyah  related  this  Hadith  and  added,  “He  then  stood  at 
Al-Muzdalifah  and  offered  the  Fajr  (Dawn)  prayer  at  an  early 
time.  When  the  light  of  dawn  broke,  he  moved  on.”  This  Hadith 
has  a  Hasan  chain  of  narrators.  The  long  Hadith  that  Jabir  bin 
‘AbduUah  narrated,  which  Muslim  collected,  stated,  “The 
Prophet  kept  standing  there  (meaning  at  ‘Arafat)  until 
sunset,  when  the  yeUow  light  had  somewhat  gone  and  the  disc 
of  the  sun  had  disappeared.  Then,  the  Prophet  £gg  made 
Usamah  sit  behind  him,  and  in  order  to  keep  her  under 
control,  puUed  the  nose  string  of  Al-Qaswa’  so  hard,  that  its 
head  touched  the  saddle.  He  gestured  with  his  right  hand  and 

’’’  Ahmad  4:261,  Abu  D&wud  2:486,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  3:633,  An- 
Nasal  5 :264 ,  and  Ibn  Majah  2 : 1004 . 

’2’  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  5 :96 . 

131  Af-Tabari  4:173-174. 

’4’  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :519. 

151  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2:517. 


563 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  ( 175  -  200}  (Part-2) 

said,  "Proceed  calmly  people,  calmly!"  Whenever  he  happened  to 
pass  over  an  elevated  tract  of  sand,  he  lightly  loosened  the  nose 
string  of  his  camel  till  she  climbed  up  and  this  is  how  they 
reached  Al-Muzdalifah.  There,  he  led  the  Maghrib  (Evening)  and 
‘Isha’  (Night)  prayers  with  one  Adhan  and  two  Iqdrnah  (which 
announces  the  imminent  start  of  the  acts  of  the  prayer)  and  did 
not  glorify  Allah  in  between  them  (i.e.,  he  did  not  perform 
voluntary  Rak'ah).  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  then  laid  down  till 
dawn  and  offered  the  Fajr  (Dawn)  prayer  with  Adhan  and 
Iqamah,  when  the  morning  light  was  clear.  He  again  mounted 
Al-Qaswa’,  and  when  he  came  to  Al-Mash‘ar  Al-Haram,  he 
faced  towards  Qiblah,  supplicated  to  Allah,  glorifying  Him  and 
saying,  La  ilaha  illallah,  and  he  continued  standing  until  the 
daylight  was  very  clear.  He  then  went  quickly  before  the  sun 
rose.”* 11 

It  is  reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  Usamah  bin  Zayd  was 
asked,  “How  was  the  Prophet’s  pace  when  he  moved?”  He  said, 
“Slow,  unless  he  found  space,  then  he  would  go  a  little  faster.”'2' 

Al-Mash‘ar  Al-Haram 

‘Abdur-Razzaq  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Umar  said  that  all  of  Al- 
Muzdalifah  is  Al-Mash‘ar  Al-Haram.13’  It  was  reported  that  Ibn 
“Umar  was  asked  about  Allah’s  statement: 

Jii  1(^=3 

4... remember  Allah  (by  glorifying  His  praises,  i.e.,  prayers 
and  invocations)  at  the  Mash'ar-il-Hardm 

He  said,  “It  is  the  Mount  and  the  surrounding  area.”*4’  It  was 
reported  that  Al-Mash‘ar  Al-Haram  is  what  is  between  the  two 
Mounts  (refer  to  the  following  Hadith ),  as  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Said  bin 
Jubayr,  ‘Ikrimah,  Mujahid,  As-Suddi,  Ar-Rabf  bin  Anas,  Al- 
Hasan  and  Qatadah  have  stated.’5' 

Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Jubayr  bin  Mut‘im  narrated  that 
the  Prophet  sgj  said: 

111  Muslim  2:886. 

’2|  Fath  Al-Bari  3 :605 ,  Muslim  2 :936 . 

’3|  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2  :521 . 

|4’  At-Tabari  4:176. 

151  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2  :52 1-522. 


564 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


* jr^**  a*  1_>a3 jtj 


.^>^1 


••AM  o/  'Arafat  is  a  place  of  standing,  and  keep  away  from 
'Uranah .  All  of  Al-Muzdalifah  is  a  place  for  standing,  and  keep 
away  from  the  bottom  of  Muhassir.  All  of  the  areas  of  Makkah 
are  a  place  for  sacrifice,  and  all  of  the  days  of  Tashricj  are  days 
of  sacrifice.^ 


Allah  then  said: 


iAttd  remember  Him  (by  invoking  Allah  for  all  good)  as  He  has 
guided  you.} 

This  Ayah  reminds  Muslims  of  Allah’s  bounty  on  them  that 
He  has  directed  and  taught  them  the  rituals  of  Hajj  according 
to  the  guidance  of  Prophet  Ibrahim  Al-Khalll.  This  is  why  Allah 
said: 


Af&U  SJ  « 


is» 


Ol3 


A. ..and  verily,  you  were,  before,  of  those  wlw  were  astray .} 

It  was  said  that  this  Ayah  refers  to  the  condition  before  the 
guidance  or  the  Qur’&n  or  the  Messenger  jg,  all  of  which  are 
correct  meanings. 


t>  <  »i<  off  ^ . 


4199.  Then  depart  from  the  place  whence  all  the  people  depart 
and  ask  Allah  for  His  forgiveness.  Truly ,  Allah  is  Oft- 
Forgiving,  Most-Merciful. 


The  Order  to  stand  on  4 Arafat  and  to  depart  from  it 

4This  Ayah  contains  Allah's  order  to  those  who  stand  at  ‘Arafat 
to  also  move  on  to  Al-Muzdalifah,  so  that  they  remember  Allah 
at  Al-Mash‘ar  Al-Haram.  Allah  commands  the  Muslim  to  stand 
with  the  rest  of  the  pilgrims  at  ‘Arafat,  unlike  Quraysh  who 
(before  Islam)  used  to  remain  in  the  sanctuary,  near  Al- 
Muzdalifah,  saying  that  they  are  the  people  of  Allah’s  Town  and 

m 


Ahmad  4 :82 . 


565 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (175  -  200)  (Part-2) 

the  servants  of  His  House.  Al-Bukhari  reported  that  ‘A’ishah 
said,  “Quraysh  and  their  allies,  who  used  to  be  called  Al- 
Httms*1* ,  used  to  stay  in  Al-Muzdalifah  while  the  rest  of  the 
Arabs  would  stand  at  ‘Arafat.  When  Islam  came,  Allah  com¬ 
manded  His  Prophet  ^  to  stand  at  ‘Arafat  and  then  proceed 
from  there.  Hence  Allah’s  statement: 

4 . .  .from  the  place  whence  all  the  people  depart  >*2’ 

This  was  also  said  by  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Mujahid,  ‘Ata’,  Qatadah 
and  As-Suddi  and  others.*31  Ibn  Jarir  chose  this  opinion  and 
said  that  there  is  Ijma'  (a  consensus  among  the  scholars)  for 
it. 

Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  Jubayr  bin  Mut‘im  said,  “My 
camel  was  lost  and  I  went  out  in  search  of  it  on  the  day  of 
Arafah,  and  I  saw  the  Prophet  jjg  standing  in  ‘Arafat.  I  said  to 
myself,  *By  Allah  he  is  from  the  Hums.  What  has  brought  him 
here?”’*4'  This  Hadith  is  also  reported  in  the  Sahthayn)^ 
Al-Bukhari  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  ‘depart’ 
mentioned  in  the  Ayah  refers  to  proceeding  from  Al-Muzdalifah 
to  Mina  to  stone  the  pillars.*6*  Allah  knows  best. 

Asking  Allah  for  His  Forgiveness 

Allah  said: 

-5  &  <£>1 

i...and  ask  Allah  for  His  forgiveness.  Truly,  Allah  is  Oft- 
Forgiving  ,  Most-Merciful .  ^ 

Allah  frequently  orders  remembrance  of  Him  after  acts  of 
worship  are  finished.  Muslim  reported  that  Allah’s  Messenger 
M  used  to  ask  Allah  for  His  forgiveness  thrice  after  the  prayer 

*1!  Literally,  “strictly  religious”,  Quraysh  were  called  so,  as  they  used 
to  say,  “We  are  the  people  of  Allah,  we  do  not  go  out  of  the 
sanctuary.” 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  8 :35 . 

131  At-Tabari  4:186-187. 

*4*  Ahmad  4 :80 . 

*5*  Fath  Al-Bari  3 :602 ,  and  Muslim  2 :894 . 

*6'  Fath.  Al-Bari  8:35. 


566 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


is  finished.11'  It  is  reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  the  Prophet 
M  encouraged  Tasbih  (saying  Subhan  Allah,  i.e.,  Glorified  is 
Allah),  Tahmid  (saying  Al-Hamdu  Lillah,  i.e.,  praise  be  to  Allah) 
and  Takbir  (saying  AUahu  Akbar,  i.e.,  Allah  is  the  Most  Great) 
thirty-three  times  each  (after  prayer).12' 

Ibn  Marduwyah  collected  the  Hadith  that  Al-Bukhari 
reported  from  Shaddad  bin  Aws,  who  stated  that  Allah’s 
Messenger  -gg  said: 

Nl  ill  N  oJI  I  :  JuiJI  JjZ  jl  j  1  j y I 
ly\  U  vIl  ijf-i  i  li  lijJ-jj  JjLc-  U1  j  ihjlZ 

IfJli  ioJI  N J  I  jkij  'i  J  JbtiCj  kill 

J  l<Jli  ^3  liliil  oui  jD  J 


“77ie  master  of  supplication  for  forgiveness,  is  for  the  servant  to 
say:  ‘O  Allah!  You  are  my  Lord,  there  is  no  deity  worthy  of 
worship  except  You.  You  have  created  me  and  I  am  Your 
servant.  I  am  on  Your  covenant,  as  much  as  I  can  be,  and 
awaiting  Your  promise.  I  seek  refuge  with  You  from  the  evil 
that  I  have  committed.  I  admit  Your  favor  on  me  and  admit  my 
faults.  So  forgive  me,  for  none  except  You  forgives  the  sins.' 
Whoever  said  these  words  at  night  and  died  that  same  night 
will  enter  Paradise.  Whoever  said  it  during  the  day  and  died 
will  enter  Paradise.®'3' 


Furthermore,  it  is  reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  ‘Abdullah 
bin  ‘Amr  said  that  Abu  Bakr  said,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah! 
Teach  me  an  invocation  so  that  I  may  invoke  (Allah)  with  it  in 
my  prayer.  He  told  me  to  say: 


j  >ii  Nj  ±/j}\  Uit  i-Ut  J\  ^iii  :  ji» 


vAllahumma  inni  zalamtu  nafsi  zulman  kathiran,  wa  la 
yaghfirudh-dhunuba  ilia  Anta  faghfirli  maghfiratan  min  ’indika, 
war-hamni  innaka  Antal-Ghafur-ur-Rahim  (O  Allah!  I  have 
done  great  injustice  to  myself  and  none  except  You  forgives 


111  Muslim  1 :414. 

|2'  Fath  Al-Bari  2 :378  and  Muslim  1 :417 . 
|3'  Fath  Al-B&ri  1 1 : 100 . 


567 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


sins,  so  please  forgive  me  and  be  merciful  to  me  as  You  are  the 
Forgiver,  the  Merciful).^ 

There  are  many  other  Hadfths  on  this  subject. 


^  ji  p~54i 

O*  ■>  <"£->  Of  4  O'  oft— I' 

itiji  4^  ^  j^fi  4j  tjil  4  tsr.  ££ 

4#^  k1  ^  **  # 


4200.  So  when  you  have  accomplished  your  Mandsik,  remember 
Allah  as  you  remember  your  forefathers  or  with  far  more 
remembrance.  But  of  mankind  tltere  are  some  who  say:  "Our 
Lord!  Give  us  (Your  bounties)  in  this  world!"  and  for  such 
there  will  be  no  portion  in  the  Hereafter.} 

4202 .  And  of  them  there  are  some  who  say :  " Our  Lord!  Give 
us  in  this  world  that  which  is  good  and  in  the  Hereafter  that 
which  is  good,  and  save  us  from  the  torment  of  the  Fire!"} 

4202 .  For  them  there  will  be  alloted  a  share  for  what  they  have 
earned.  And  Allah  is  swift  at  reckoning.} 


The  Order  for  Remembrance  of  Allah  and  seeking  Good 
in  this  Life  and  the  Hereafter  upon  completing  the  Rites 
of  Hajj 

Allah  commands  that  He  be  remembered  after  the  rituals  are 
performed. 


4^=*'X£  •%$} 


4... as  you  remember  your  forefathers} 

Said  bin  Jubayr  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “During  the  time 
of  Jahiliyyah,  people  used  to  stand  during  the  (Haft  season, 
and  one  of  them  would  say,  *My  father  used  to  feed  (the  poor), 
help  others  (end  their  disputes,  with  his  money),  pay  the 
Diyah  (i.e.,  blood  money),’  and  so  forth.  The  only  Dhikr  that 
they  had  was  that  they  would  remember  the  deeds  of  their 
fathers.  Allah  then  revealed  to  Muhammad  jg: 

^  Fath  Al-Bari  13 :484  and  Muslim  4 :2078 . 


568 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathir 


4  y\  'faa'fc'.  •$$$  iii  ij/==>'.>l»  ^ 

4 Remember  Allah  as  you  remember  your  forefathers  or  with  far 
more  remembrance.^ 

Therefore,  remembering  Allah  the  Exalted  and  Ever  High  is 
always  encouraged.  We  should  mention  that  when  Allah  used 
“or”  in  the  Ayah,  He  meant  to  encourage  the  people  to 
remember  Him  more  than  they  remember  their  forefathers,  not 
that  the  word  entails  a  doubt  (as  to  which  is  larger  or  bigger). 
This  statement  is  similar  to  the  Ayat. 

4...as  stones  or  even  worse  in  hardness }  (2:74)  and, 

i‘& t  ss  $  $  gg 


4 . .  .fear  men  as  they  fear  Allah  or  even  more)*  (4:77)  and, 

4And  We  sent  him  to  a  hundred  thousand  (people)  or  even 
more }  (37:147)  and, 

i  £2  C& 

iAnd  was  at  a  distance  of  tioo  bows'  length  or  (even)  nearer. $ 
(53:9) 

Allah  encourages  calling  Him  in  supplication  after 
remembering  Him,  because  this  will  make  it  more  likely  that 
the  supplication  will  be  accepted.  Allah  also  criticizes  those 
who  only  supplicate  to  Him  about  the  affairs  of  this  life,  while 
ignoring  the  affairs  of  the  Hereafter.  Allah  said: 

4(3^*  o?  _ \  4  yfjSb 

iBut  of  mankind  there  are  some  who  say:  "Our  Lord!  Give  us 
(Your  bounties)  in  this  world!"  and  far  such  there  will  be  no 
portion  in  the  Hereafter 

meaning,  they  have  no  share  in  the  Hereafter.  This  criticism 
serves  to  discourage  other  people  from  imitating  those 


m 


Ibn  Abi  H&tim  2 :530 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2 


569 


mentioned. 

Said  bin  Jubayr  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Some  bedouins 
used  to  come  to  the  standing  area  (‘Arafat)  and  supplicate 
saying,  ‘O  Allah!  Make  it  a  rainy  year,  a  fertile  year  and  a  year 
of  good  child  bearing.’  They  would  not  mention  any  of  the 
affairs  of  the  Hereafter.  Thus,  Allah  revealed  about  them: 

4^*"  o?  j _ _ J  Uj  do)'  4  t<.T.  dj  ^ 

46wf  of  mankind  there  are  some  who  say:  "Our  Lord!  Give  us 
(Your  bounties)  in  this  world!"  and  for  such  there  will  be  no 
portion  in  the  Hereafter. $ 

The  believers  who  came  after  them  used  to  say: 


4-AJ'  d j*  ci) 


iOur  Lord!  Give  us  in  this  world  that  which  is  good  and  in  the 
Hereafter  that  which  is  good,  and  save  us  from  the  torment  of 
the  Fire!"} 


Next,  Allah  revealed: 

id1  gd  %  d  dd  m  JUbfy 


iFor  them  there  will  be  alloted  a  share  for  what  they  have 
earned.  And  Allah  is  swift  at  reckoning .} 

Hence,  Allah  praised  those  who  ask  for  the  affairs  of  both 
this  life  and  the  Hereafter.  He  said: 


jj  ^  4  W  t®  SJY  cf  ^} 


iAnd  of  them  there  are  some  who  say :  "Our  Lord!  Give  us  in 
this  world  that  which  is  good  and  in  the  Hereafter  that  which  is 
good,  and  save  us  from  the  torment  of  the  Fire!"} 

The  supplication  mentioned  and  praised  in  the  Ayah 
includes  all  good  aspects  of  this  life  and  seeks  refuge  from  all 
types  of  evil.  The  good  of  this  life  concerns  every  material 
request  of  well-being,  spacious  dwelling,  pleasing  mates, 
sufficient  provision,  beneficial  knowledge,  good  profession  or 
deeds,  comfortable  means  of  transportation  and  good  praise, 
all  of  which  the  scholars  of  Tafsir  have  mentioned  regarding 
this  subject.  All  of  these  are  but  a  part  of  the  good  that  is 
sought  in  this  life. 


572 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


Muslim  also  recorded 
it.'1' 

Al-Hakim  reported 
that  Said  bin  Jubayr 
said,  “A  man  came  to 
Ibn  ‘Abbas  and  said, 
‘I  worked  for  some 
people  and  settled  for 
a  part  of  my 
compensation  in 
return  for  their  taking 
me  to  perform  Hajj 
with  them.  Is  this 
acceptable?’  Ibn 
‘Abbas  said,  ‘You  are 
among  those  whom 
Allah  described: 

tL;  !L±J>  & 

iFor  them  there  wilt  be 
alloted  a  share  for  what 
they  have  earned.  And 
Allah  is  swift  at 
reckoning. 

Al-Hakim  then  commented;  "This  Hadith  is  authentic 
according  to  the  criteria  of  the  Two  Shaykhs  (Al-Bukhari  and 
Muslim)  although  they  did  not  record  it." 


J 


j£5iis£  _  rT 


,  ~'f'  •'t'fi' .  #{^4  •?  •>,  <><. 

0 


4-^  0*J  OJ*_5  j  Cr*-*  ti 


4203.  And  remember  Allah  during  the  Appointed  Days.  But 
whosoever  hastens  to  leave  in  two  days,  there  is  no  sin  on  him 
and  whosoever  stays  on,  there  is  no  sin  on  him,  if  his  aim  is  to 
do  good  and  obey  Allah  (fear  Him),  and  knoio  r hat  you  will 
surely  be  gathered  unto  Him.} 


Muslim  4  :2068. 
121  Al-Hakim  2:277. 


572 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Remembering  Allah  during  the  Days  of  Tashriq  -  Days  of 
Bating  and  Drinking 

Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  The  Appointed  Days  are  the  Days  of  Tashriq 
(11- 12- 13th  of  Dhul-Hijjah)  while  the  Known  Days  are  the 
(first)  ten  (days  of  Dhul-Hijjah).”*1'  ‘Ikrimah  said  that: 

■}'Qi  'Q  } 


iAnd  remember  Allah  during  the  Appointed  Days.} 


means  reciting  the  Takbir  -  AUahu  Akbar,  AUahu  Akbar, 
during  the  days  of  Tashriq  after  the  compulsory  prayers.*2' 
Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  ‘Uqbah  bin  ‘Amr  said  that 
Allah’s  Messenger  jgg  said: 


l5i> 


«T7ie  day  of  'Arafah  (9th  of  Dhul-Hijjah),  the  day  of  the 
Sacrifice  (10th)  and  the  days  of  the  Tashriq  (11-1 2-13 th)  are  our 
‘ Id  (festival)  for  we  people  of  Islam.  These  are  days  of  eating 
and  drinking.^ 

Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  Nubayshah  Al-Hudhali  said  that 
Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said: 

lii  Jyj  \s\  id  ^^1  id» 

-  #  #  ’  #  ^ 

«77ie  days  of  Tashriq  are  days  of  eating,  drinking  and  Dhikr 
(remembering)  ofAlldh .» 

Muslim  also  recorded  this  Hadith l*4* 

We  also  mentioned  the  Hadith  of  Jubayr  bin  Mut“im: 

■££  \ys  fdj  1 41s  ii>» 


«A//  0/  ‘Arafat  is  a  standing  place  and  all  of  the  days  of  Tashriq 
are  days  of  Sacrifice. n*5’ 

We  also  mentioned  the  Hadith  by  ‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Ya‘mar 


111  Al-Qurfubi  3  :3. 

*2'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :545. 

131  Ahmad  4:152. 

*4'  Ahmad  5 :75,  and  Muslim  2 :800 . 
151  Ahmad  4:82. 


573 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


Ad-Diyli: 


r>!  ^  (J!  (j?  (Ir^  (*^JD 


9 The  days  of  Mind  (Tashriq)  are  three.  Those  who  hasten  in 
two  days  then  there  is  no  sin  in  it,  and  those  who  delay  (i.e., 
remain  in  Mind  for  a  third  day)  then  there  is  no  sin  in  if.nl1' 

Ibn  Jarir  reported  that  Abu  Hurayrah  narrated  that  Allah’s 
Messenger  said: 

®4ul  J ijJLdl 

*  ' 

'The  days  of  Tashriq  are  days  of  eating  and  remembering 
Allah.* 


Ibn  Jarir  reported  that  Abu  Hurayrah  narrated  that  Allah’s 
Messenger  sent  ‘Abdullah  bin  Hudhafah  to  Mina  proclaiming: 


5*  Jij  W  ifU’Vi  .jJ>  Y» 


“Do  not  fast  these  days  (i.e.,  Tashriq  days),  for  they  are  days 
of  eating,  drinking  and  remembering  Allah  the  Exalted  and 
Most  Honored.* *2* 


The  Appointed  Days 


Miqsam  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  the  Appointed  Days 
are  the  days  of  Tashriq,  four  days:  the  day  of  the  Sacrifice 
(10th  of  Dhul-Hijjah)  and  three  days  after  that.'3' 

This  opinion  was  .also  reported  of  Ibn  ‘Umar,  Ibn  Az-Zubayr, 
Abu  Musa,  ‘Ata’,  Mujahid,  ‘Ikrimah,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Abu 
Malik,  Ibrahim  An-Nakhal,  Yahya  bin  Abu  Kathir,  Al-Hasan, 
Qatadah,  As-Suddi,  Az-Zuhri,  Ar-Rabi‘  bin  Anas,  Ad-Dahhak, 
Muqatil  bin  Hayyan,  ‘Ata’  Al-Khurasani,  Malik  bin  Anas,  and 
others.'4'  In  addition,  the  apparent  meaning  of  the  following 
Ayah  supports  this  opinion: 


4&. 


iBut  whosoever  hastens  to  leave  in  tivo  days,  there  is  no  sin  on 


I1'  Abu  Dawud  2:485. 

121  At-Jabari  4:211. 

I3'  At-Tabari  4 :2 13 . 

I4'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :547-549. 


574 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathtr 


him  and  whosoever  stays  on,  there  is  no  sin  on  him.} 

So  the  Ayah  hints  to  the  three  days  after  the  day  of 
Sacrifice. 

Allah’s  statement: 

ij  \x£= 9%} 


iAnd  remember  Allah  during  the  Appointed  Days} 

directs  remembering  Allah  upon  slaughtering  the  animals, 
after  the  prayers,  and  by  Dhikr  (supplication)  in  general.  It  also 
includes  Takbir  and  remembering  Allah  while  throwing  the 
pebbles  every  day  during  the  Tashriq  days.  A  Hadith  that  Abu 
Dawud  and  several  others  collected  states: 


4>i  Ji  ■M'i  is/j  &jA\j  uin  jS  ^ia\j  odu  JiijLn  di 

\  ■  ■ *. 


*Taioaf  around  the  House,  Sa'f  between  As-Safd  and  Al- 
Marwah  and  throwing  the  pebbles  were  legislated  so  that  Allah 
is  remembered  in  Dhikr 


When  mentioning  the  first  procession  (refer  to  2:199)  and  the 
second  procession  of  the  people  upon  the  end  of  the  Hajj 
season,  when  they  start  to  return  to  their  areas,  after  they  had 
gathered  during  the  rituals  and  at  the  standing  places,  Allah 
said, 


3?  \&j} 


iand  obey  Allah  (fear  Him),  and  know  that  you  will  surely  be 
gathered  unto  Him.} 


Similarly,  Allah  said: 

4S  0  $  ft* 


$And  it  is  He  Who  has  created  you  on  the  earth,  and  to  Him 
you  shall  be  gathered  back.}  (23:79) 


V  ii'j  J-lli'j  xJtj  J*jjS  j  UJj 

JlL-Jj  4J|T  i]  Jj>  'jjj  i/To^ 


m 


Abu  Dawud  2  :447 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


575 


%  SSf  ^  ^0\ 


«3]^J 


<204.  And  of  mankind  there  is  he  whose  speech  may  please  you 
(O  Muhammad  sg),  in  Otis  worldly  life,  and  he  calls  Allah  to 
witness  as  to  that  which  is  in  his  heart,  yet  he  is  the  most 
quarrelsome  of  the  opponents. $ 

i205.  And  when  he  turns  away  (from  you  O  Muhammad  sg), 
his  effort  in  the  land  is  to  make  mischief  therein  and  to  destroy 
the  crops  and  the  cattle,  and  Allah  likes  not  mischief}. 

<206.  And  when  it  is  said  to  him,  "Fear  Allah",  he  is  led  by 
arrogance  to  (more)  crime.  So  enough  for  him  is  Hell,  and 
worst  indeed  is  that  place  to  rest!} 

<207.  And  of  mankind  is  he  who  would  sell  himself,  seeking 
the  pleasure  of  Allah.  And  Allah  is  foil  of  kindness  to  (His) 
servants.} 


The  Characteristics  of  the  Hypocrites 

As-Suddi  said  that  these  Ayat  were  revealed  about  Al- 
Akhnas  bin  Shariq  Ath-Thaqafi  who  came  to  Allah’s  Messenger 
M  and  announced  his  Islam  although  his  heart  concealed 
otherwise.'11 

Ibn  ‘Abbas  narrated  that  these  Ayat  were  revealed  about 
some  of  the  hypocrites  who  criticized  Khubayb  and  his 
companions  who  were  killed  during  the  Raji‘  incident.'21 
Thereafter,  Allah  sent  down  His  condemnation  of  the 
hypocrites  and  His  praise  for  Khubayb  and  his  companions: 

<«i>f  .<%■ 

iAnd  of  mankind  is  he  who  would  sell  himself,  seeking  the 
pleasure  of  Allah . } 

It  was  also  said  that  they  refer  to  the  hypocrites  and  the 
believers  in  general.'31  This  is  the  opinion  of  Qatadah, 

111  At-Tabari  4 :229 . 

'  1  When  ‘Adal  and  Qarah  tribes  killed  the  ten  Companions  whom  the 
Prophet  jg  sent  to  teach  them  the  Qur’an  and  Islam . 

131  At-Tabari  4:230. 


Mujahid,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  and  several  others,  and  it  is 
correct. 

Ibn  Jarir  related  that  Al-Qurazi  said  that  Nawf  Al-Bikali,  who 
used  to  read  (previous  Divine)  Books  said,  T  find  the 
description  of  some  members  of  this  Ummah  in  the  previously 
revealed  Books  of  Allah:  they  (hypocrites)  are  people  who  use 
the  religion  to  gain  material  benefit.  Their  tongues  are  sweeter 
than  honey,  but  their  hearts  are  more  bitter  than  Sabir  (a 
bitter  plant,  aloe).  They  show  the  people  the  appearance  of 
sheep  while  their  hearts  hide  the  viciousness  of  wolves.  Allah 
said,  They  dare  challenge  Me,  but  they  are  deceived  by  Me.  I 
swear  by  Myself  that  I  will  send  a  Fitnah  (trial,  calamity)  on 
them  that  will  make  the  wise  man  bewildered.*  I  contemplated 
about  these  statements  and  found  them  in  the  Qur'an 
describing  the  hypocrites: 


4*4-#  4  U  4j»f  4  Jdy 


{Ul!  hff} 


iAtid  of  mankind  there  is  he  whose  speech  may  please  you  (O 
Muhammad  $&),  in  this  worldly  life,  and  he  calls  Allah  to 
witness  as  to  that  which  is  in  his  heart,  ^ 

This  statement  by  Al-Qurazi  is  Hasan  Sahih .  Allah  said: 


4... and  he  calls  Allah  to  witness  as  to  that  which  is  in  his 
heart,} 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  such  people  pretend  to  be  Muslims, 
but  defy  Allah  by  the  disbelief  and  hypocrisy  that  their  hearts 
conceal.  Similarly  Allah  said: 


4$  Jt  Ift 


iThey  may  hide  (their  crimes)  from  men,  but  they  cannot  hide 
(them)  from  Allah.}  (4:108) 

This  Tafsir  was  reported  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas^  by  Ibn  Ishaq.  It 
was  also  said  that  the  Ayah  means  that  when  such  people 
announce  their  Islam,  they  swear  by  Allah  that  what  is  in 
their  hearts  is  the  same  of  what  their  tongues  are 


111  At-Tabari  4:232. 
121  At-Tabari  4:230. 


577 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 

pronouncing.  This  is  also  a  correct  meaning  for  the  Ayah  that 
was  chosen  by  ‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Zayd  bin  AslamJ1'  It  is 
also  the  choice  of  Ibn  Jarir  who  related  it  to  Ibn  'Abbas  and 
Mujahid.  Allah  knows  best. 

Allah  said: 


AYet  he  is  the  most  Aladd  of  the  opponents.}  (2:204) 

The  Ayah  used  the  word  Aladd  here,  which  literally  means 
“wicked’  (here  it  means  ‘quarrelsome’).  A  variation  of  the  word 
Ludda  was  also  used  in  another  Ayah: 

.*> 


ASo  that  you  (Muliammad)  warn  with  it  (the  Qur'an )  a  Ludda 
people .}  (19:97) 

Hence,  a  hypocrite  lies,  alters  the  truth  when  he  quarrels 
and  does  not  care  for  the  truth.  Rather,  he  deviates  from  the 
truth,  deceives  and  becomes  most  quarrelsome.  It  is  reported 
in  Sahih.  that  Allah’s  Messenger  Jg  said: 

*  j oi-  oiU-  iwiii  lit  jilUl 

“The  signs  of  a  hypocrite  are  three :  Whenever  he  speaks,  he 
tells  a  lie.  Whenever  he  promises,  he  always  breaks  it  (his 
promise).  If  you  have  a  dispute  with  him,  he  is  most 
quarrelsome .»*2’ 

Imam  Bukhari  reported  that  ‘A’ishah  narrated  that  the 
Prophet  agg  said: 

oft  1  4il  J)  '^i\  0)» 


“The  most  hated  person  to  Allah  is  he  who  is  Aladd  and 
Khasim  (meaning  most  quarrelsome)  .»*3' 

Allah  then  said: 


4 


&  Z& 


111  At-Tabari  4:233. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  1:111. 
131  Fath  Al-Bari  8:36. 


578 


Tafsir  ton  Kathir 


4And  when  he  hints  away  (from  you  O  Muhammad),  he 
struggles  in  the  land  to  make  mischief  therein  and  to  destroy  tlte 
crops  and  the  cattle,  and  Allah  likes  not  mischief.  } 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  such  persons  are  deviant  in  the 
tongue,  evil  in  the  deeds,  their  words  are  fabricated,  their 
belief  is  wicked  and  their  works  are  immoral.  The  Ayah  used 
the  (Arabic  word)  Sa‘a  (literally,  “tries’  or  ‘intends’).  This  word 
was  also  used  to  describe  Pharaoh: 


4^53^5  Cri  4  o( 


4Then  he  turned  his  back,  Yas'd  (striving  hard  against  Allah) . 
Then  he  gathered  Ohs  people)  and  cried  aloud  saying,  T  am 
your  lord,  most  high.'  So  Allalt,  seized  him  with  a  punishing 
example  for  his  last  and  first  transgression .  Verily,  in  this  is  an 
instructive  admonition  for  whosoever  fears  Allah.  ^  (79:22-26) 

[Sa‘a  was  also  used  in  the  Ayah]: 


Si  oil  [>»->£  O'  fy  Ji  aji  yill  Crtill 


<0  you  who  believe  (Muslims)!  When  tlte  call  is  proclaimed  for 
the  Saldh  (prayer)  on  the  day  of  Friday  (Jumu'ah  prayer), 
As'aio  come  to  the  remembrance  of  Allah.}  (62:9) 

This  Ayah  means,  “(when  the  call  to  the  Friday  prayer  is 
announced)  intend  and  then  proceed  to  attend  the  Friday 
prayer.’  We  should  mention  that  hastening  to  the  mosque  is 
condemed  by  the  Sunnah  (as  this  is  another  meaning  for  the 
word  Sa‘a ): 


j  LfUi  {Jrij-j  Uylj  /ojiH  pij  Ujife  ISLsji  iij« 


iWhen  you  come  to  attend  the  prayer,  do  not  come  in  a  Sa'f 
Oiaste).  Rather,  come  to  it  while  walking  at  ease  and  in  peace 
(or  grace). t1'1 

The  hypocrite  has  no  motive  in  this  life  but  to  cause  mischief 
and  to  destroy  the  crops  and  the  offspring,  including  what  the 
animals  produce  and  what  the  people  depend  on  for  their 
livelihood.  Mujahid  said,  “If  the  hypocrite  strives  for  mischief 
m 


Muslim  1 :420 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Bagarali  (201  -  224)  ( Part 2} _ 579 

in  the  land,  Allah  prevents  the  rain  from  falling  and  thus  the 
crops  and  the  offspring  perish.”  The  Ayah  continues: 

44  V 

4  ...and  Allah  likes  not  mischief. $  that  is,  Allah  does  not  like  those 
who  possess  these  characteristics,  or  those  who  act  like  this. 


Rejecting  Advice  is  Characteristic  of  the  Hypocrites 

Allah  said: 


4  ijJi  4'  ^  Si 


4 And  when  it  is  said  to  him,  "Fear  Allah",  he  is  led  by 
arrogance  to  (more)  crime.} 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  when  the  hypocrite,  who  deviates  in 
his  speech  and  deeds,  is  advised  and  commanded  to  fear 
Allah,  refrain  from  his  evil  deeds  and  adhere  to  the  truth,  he 
refuses  and  becomes  angiy  and  outraged,  as  he  is  used  to 
doing  evil.  This  Ayah  is  similar  to  what  Allah  said: 


%  jti  %Sj>  j.  -jli  ^ 

4i&j&$  SSj  ^4\ 


4And  when  Our  clear  verses  are  recited  to  them,  you  will 
notice  a  denial  on  the  faces  of  the  disbelievers!  They  are  nearly 
ready  to  attack  with  violence  those  who  recite  Our  verses  to 
them.  Say:  "Shall  l  tell  you  of  something  worse  than  that?  The 
Fire  (of  Hell)  which  Allah  has  promised  to  those  who 
disbelieved,  and  ivorst  indeed  is  that  destination !}  (22:72) 

This  is  why  in  this  Ayah,  Allah  said: 

4So  enough  far  him  is  Hell,  and  worst  indeed  is  that  place  to 
rest } 

meaning,  the  Fire  is  enough  punishment  for  the  hypocrite. 


The  Sincere  Believer  prefers  pleasing  Allah 

Allah  said: 


580 


Tgfsir  ton  Kathir 

4And  of  mankind  is  he  who  would  sell  himself,  seeking  the 
pleasure  of  Allah.} 

After  Allah  described  the  evil  characteristics  of  the 
hypocrites,  He  mentioned  the  good  qualities  of  the  believers. 
Allah  said: 


4And  of  mankind  is  he  who  would  sell  himself,  seeking  the 
pleasure  of  Allah.} 


Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Anas,  Said  bin  Musayyib,  Abu  ‘Uthman  An- 
Nahdi,  Ikrimah  and  several  other  scholars  said  that  this  Ayah 
was  revealed  about  Suhayb  bin  Sinan  Ar-Rumi.  When  Suhayb 
became  a  Muslim  in  Makkah  and  intended  to  migrate  (to  Al- 
Madinah),  the  people  (Quraysh)  prevented  him  from  migrating 
with  his  money.  They  said  that  if  he  forfeits  his  property,  he  is 
free  to  migrate.  He  abandoned  his  money  and  preferred  to 
migrate,  and  Allah  revealed  this  Ayah  about  him.  ‘Umar  bin 
Khattab  and  several  other  Companions  met:  Suhayb  close  to 
the  outskirts  of  Al-Madinah  at  Al-Harrah  (flat  lands  with  black 
stones).  They  said  to  him,  “The  trade  has  indeed  been 
successful.”  He  answered  them,  “You  too,  may  Allah  never 
allow  your  trade  to  fail.  What  is  the  matter?”  ‘Umar  told  him 
that  Allah  has  revealed  this  Ayah  (2:207)  about  him.  It  was 
also  reported  that  Allah’s  Messenger  said,  “The  trade  has 
been  successful,  O  Suhayb!  "I1! 

The  meaning  of  the  Ayah  (2:207)  includes  every  Mujahid  in 
the  way  of  Allah.  Allah  said  in  another  Ayah: 


v-  lyj  of* j- — v  I  Ijcj 

$R  £  &&  4'  \t£-&  %  <Zi 


iVerily,  Allah  has  purchased  of  the  believers  their  lives  and 
their  properties  for  (the  price)  that  theirs  shall  be  the  Paradise. 
They  fight  in  Allah’s  cause,  so  they  kill  (others)  and  are  killed. 
It  is  a  promise  in  truth  which  is  binding  on  Him  in  the  Tawrah 
and  the  Injil  and  the  Qur'cbi .  And  who  is  truer  to  his  covenant 


m 


At-Tabari  4 :248 . 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baaarah  QOl  -  224)  (Parti 


581 


than  Allah?  Then  rejoice  in  the  bargain  which  you  have 
concluded.  That  is  the  supreme  success (9:1 1 1) 


When  Hisham  bin  ‘Amr  penetrated  the  lines  of  the  enemy, 
some  people  criticized  him.  Umar  bin  Al-Khattab  and  Abu 
Hurayrah  refuted  them  and  recited  this  Ayah : 


iAnd  of  mankind  is  he  who  would  sell  himself,  seeking  the  pleasure 
of  Allah .  And  Allah  is  full  of  kindness  to  (His)  servants 


ft  \J4l  %  j  JJ&I  l£St; 


4208.  O  you  who  believe!  Enter  Siltn  perfectly,  and  follow  not 
the  footsteps  of  Shaytan  (Satan).  Verily,  he  is  to  you  a  plain 
enemy. $ 

42 09.  Then  if  you  slide  back  after  the  clear  signs  (Prophet 
Muhammad  and  this  Qur'an  and  Islam)  have  come  to  you, 
then  know  that  Allah  is  All-Mighty,  All-Wise 


Entering  Islam  in  its  Entirety  is  obligated 

Allah  commands  His  servants  who  believe  in  Him  and  have 
faith  in  His  Messenger  3g§  to  implement  all  of  Islam’s  legislation 
and  law,  to  adhere  to  all  of  its  commandments,  as  much  as 
they  can,  and  to  refrain  from  all  of  its  prohibitions.  ‘Al-‘Awfi 
said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  and  also  Mujahid,  Tawtis,  Ad- 
Dahhak,  *Ikrimah,  Qatadah,  As-Suddi  and  Ibn  Zayd  said  that 
Allah’s  statement: 

4JLj\  j  l #3) 

4Enter  Silm)  means  Islam.11'  Allah’s  statement: 

4i-»d==>  ^ 

4  ■ . . perfectly ^  means,  in  its  entirety.  This  is  the  Tafsir  of  Ibn 
‘Abbas,  Mujahid,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  ‘Ikrimah,  Ar-RabT  bin  Anas, 
As-Suddi,  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan,  Qatadah  and  Ad-Dahhak.121 

111  At-Jabari  4 :252,  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :584-585. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :586-588. 


582 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

Mujahid  said  that  the  Ayah  means,  Perform  all  the  good  works 
and  the  various  pious  deeds,  this  is  especially  addressed  to 
those  from  among  the  People  of  the  Scripture  who  embraced 
the  faith.'111 

Ibn  Abu  Hatim  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that: 

jL-JI  j  ijU-ii  yjj?  ^ 


40  you  who  believe!  Enter  Silm  perfectly } 

refers  to  the  believers  among  the  People  of  the  Scripture.  This 
is  because  they  believed  in  Allah,  some  of  them  still  followed 
some  parts  of  the  Tawrah  and  the  previous  revelations.  So 
Allah  said: 

413&-  j  l£it» 

iEnter  Islam  perfectly .^,21  Allah  thus  commanded  them  to 
embrace  the  legislation  of  the  religion  of  Muhammad  in  its 
entirety  and  to  avoid  abandoning  any  part  of  it.  They  should  no 
longer  adhere  to  the  Tawrah. 

Allah  then  said: 


4 . .  .and  follow  not  the  footsteps  of  Shay  tan} 

meaning,  perform  the  acts  of  worship  and  avoid  what  Satan 
commands  you  to  do.  This  is  because: 


-icjtp  \JJS  &  $A  Ofr 


4He  (Shaytan)  commands  you  only  ivhat  is  evil  and  Fahshd' 
(sinful),  and  that  you  should  say  about  Allah  what  you  know 
not. M2: 169)  and: 


cdsA)  £>*  I&5 


4Hc  only  invites  his  Hizb  (followers)  that  they  may  become  the 
dwellers  of  the  blazing  Fire.}  (35:6) 

Hence,  Allah  said: 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2:585. 
121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :582 . 


itd  %  p  &} 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2 


583 


i  Verily,  he  is  to  you  an  open  enemy.) 

Allah  said: 

p±c>&  >£) 

iThen  if  you  slide  back  after  the  clear  signs  have  come  to  you) 

meaning,  if  you  deviate  from  the  Truth  after  clear  proofs  have 
been  established  against  you, 

A.  jiff-  -i'  oJ  \fSz%) 

i- . .then  know  that  Allah  is  All-Mighty)  in  His  punishment,  and 
no  one  can  escape  His  vengeance  or  defeat  Him. 

ii^) 


iAll-Wise)  in  His  decisions,  actions  and  rulings.  Hence  Abu  Al- 
‘Aliyah,  Qatadah  and  Ar-Rabi‘  bin  Anas  said,  “He  is  Mighty  in 
His  vengeance,  Wise  in  His  decision.”11* 


y >  A;*  >✓> 

g-j 


4210.  Do  they  then  wait  for  anything  other  than  that  Allah 
should  come  to  them  over  the  shadoios  of  the  clouds  and  the 
angels?  (Then)  the  case  would  be  already  judged.  And  to  Allah 
return  all  matters  (for  decision).) 


Do  not  delay  embracing  the  Faith 


ADo  they  then  wait  for  anything  other  than  tltat  Allah  should 
come  to  them  over  the  sltadows  of  the  clouds  and  the  angels?) 

on  the  Day  of  Resurrection  to  judge  the  early  and  the  latter 
creations.  Allah  shall  then  reward  each  according  to  his  or  her 
deeds;  and  whoever  does  good  shall  see  it,  and  whoever  does 
evil  shall  see  it.  This  is  why  Allah  said: 


&  £  JiS  &) 


i(Then)  the  case  would  be  already  judged.  And  to  Allah  return 
all  matters  (for  decision).) 


***  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :591 . 


584 


max 


rr 


mm 


***}  ■  J  *■  ut  >  Ji  *lr^lZi>~!  J— * 

y>  •  *  ✓  *  *  )  /  ✓  >*  — '  .  ^  ^  - 

<>jUo;j  (jp 

orr^'j  \y+\+ LfJ&Ljtoj j*~*$ Q j4'  *>r^'  l? Ji^T 


ft  ^  ^ ^  ^  a  ^  r  r/»  ^  #<f  j  ^ 

;L^>j\i)  4  TjP  jp  | ^1 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathy 

Similarly,  Allah 
said: 

&  J#I  &  \ii  yt) 

itiij  Jifj  ;% 

**  / 

///  /■*> 
*1  JV>. 


Juo  *yj\  <jOiW  J^^scJsJbi-l  U»j  4-j  \ ja3li>-1  \^5 

lj|La\^^^jJ\4i\^J^  J^,  frXu  (jri  »  WU 

l£  *£  4-^ O 

»/i  »  #**  ^  r  ■*  m  -l  „ 

LJj  1  Jb o»> J'«.V.i.^>- ^ 

ji  ^  wo  j»  S\3^ 

j*  j '--  U^i  J^Crt  \ 3^-*ju^*J  S-r^“^  Ui\j 


■*1  M'  *  ,"•  vif  >;-  <"  .  '*' 


iNayl  When  the  earth 
is  ground  to  powder. 
And  your  Lord  comes 
with  the  angels  in  rows. 
And  Hell  will  be 
brought  near  that  Day. 
On  that  Day  will  man 
remember,  but  how  will 
that  remembrance  (then) 
avail  him?)  (89:21-23) 
and: 

J  %  >J#  ji) 
dk  ji  &J  &  ■)  Is^uiii 
4<tyj  v^.'*  J“ 


4Do  they  that  wait  for  anything  other  than  that  the  angels 
should  come  to  diem,  or  that  your  Lord  (Allah)  should  come,  or 
that  some  of  the  signs  of  your  Lord  should  come  (i.e.,  portents 
of  the  Hour,  e.g.,  rising  of  the  sun  from  the  west)!)  (6:158) 

Abu  Jafar  Razi  reported  that  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah  narrated  that: 

iiUpi)  £3\  4  in  J  $,j£  &) 

4Do  they  then  wait  for  anything  other  than  that  Allah  should 
come  to  them  over  the  shadows  of  the  clouds  and  the  angels?) 

means,  the  angels  will  descend  on  the  shadows  of  clouds, 
while  Allah  comes  as  He  wills  J1^  Some  of  the  reciters  read  it, 

m 


A{ -Tabari  4 :264 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


585 


>i\  ul  ji 


Do  they  then  wait  for  anything  other  than  that  Allah  should 
come  to  them  and  also  the  angels  over  the  shadows  of  the 
clouds. 


This  is  similar  to  Allah’s  other  statement: 


4  <3*-^ 


4Anrf  (remember)  the  Day  when  the  heaven  shall  be  rent 
asunder  with  clouds,  and  the  angels  will  be  sent  down,  with  a 
grand  descending (25:25) 


,* f  fif  A;  Y/  | *<*  f  ff  S*'*  i ••  ^  x,  /  *✓  V 

*u>  op  4>»w  i*  ij;  f»  *— >  JJ-  ,>"j  ,#j'.  o?  j^e1*  (O  ly;  j—r 

ijijf  o-r'jJ'j  Si  Qjl'  ijjyS”  C/jjj 

jjij  itls  £/*  oil  ju'  LaJ' 


4221.  Ask  the  Children  of  Israel  how  many  clear  Ayat  (proofs, 
evidences,  verses,  lessons,  signs,  revelations,  etc.)  We  gave 
them.  And  whoever  changes  Allah's  favor  after  it  has  come  to 
him,  [e.g.,  renounces  the  religion  of  Allah  (Islam)  and  accepts 
Kufr  (disbelief)]  then  surely,  Allah  is  severe  in  punishment .$ 

4222.  Beautified  is  the  life  of  this  world  for  those  ivho 
disbelieve,  and  they  mock  at  those  who  believe.  But  those  who 
have  Taqioa,  will  be  above  them  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection. 
And  Allaii  gives  (of  His  bounty,  blessings,  favors,  and  honors 
on  the  Day  of  Resurrection)  to  whom  He  wills  without  limit. $ 


The  Punishment  for  changing  Allah’s  Favor  and 
mocking  the  Believers 

Allah  mentioned  that  the  Children  of  Israel,  were  witnesses 
to  many  clear  signs  that  attest  to  the  truth  of  Moses  regarding 
what  he  was  sent  with  for  them.  They  witnessed  his  hand 
(when  it  became  lit  with  light),  his  parting  the  sea,  his  striking 
the  rock  (and  water  flowed  from  the  rock),  the  clouds  that 
shaded  them  during  the  intense  heat,  the  manna  and  the 
quails,  and  so  forth.  These  signs  attested  to  the  existence  of 
the  Creator  and  the  truth  of  Moses  by  whose  hand  these  signs 
appeared.  Yet,  so  many  among  them  changed  Allah’s  favor,  by 
preferring  disbelief  to  faith  and  by  ignoring  Allah’s  favors, 


586 


Tafsir  Tbn  Kathir 


Sii  **j iC- H  jJo  ^  <5i(  iy 


4 And  whoever  changes  Allah's  favor  after  it  had  come  to  him, 
then  surely,  Allah  is  severe  in  punishment.} 

Similarly,  Allah  said  about  the  disbelievers  of  Quraysh: 


iHave  you  not  seen  those  who  have  changed  the  blessings  of 
Allah  into  disbelief,  and  caused  tlteir  people  to  dwell  in  the 
house  of  destruction?  Hell,  in  which  they  will  bum,  -  and 
what  an  evil  place  to  settle  in!}  (14:28,  29) 

Then  Allah  states  that  He  has  made  the  life  of  this  world 
beautiful  for  the  disbelievers  who  are  satisfied  with  it,  who 
collect  wealth,  but  refrain  from  spending  it  on  what  they  have 
been  commanded,  which  could  earn  them  Allah’s  pleasure. 
Instead,  they  ridicule  the  believers  who  ignore  this  life  and 
who  spend  whatever  they  earn  on  what  pleases  their  Lord.  The 
believers  spend  seeking  Allah’s  Face,  and  this  is  why  they  have 
gained  the  ultimate  happiness  and  the  best  share  on  the  Day 
of  the  Return.  Therefore,  they  will  be  exalted  above  the 
disbelievers  at  the  Gathering  Place,  when  they  are  gathered, 
during  the  resurrection  and  in  their  final  destination.  The 
believers  will  reside  in  the  highest  grades  in  the  utmost  highs, 
while  the  disbelievers  will  reside  in  the  lowest  of  lows  (in  the 
Fire). 

This  is  why  Allah  said: 

4yt^»-  tlil  £  jj/  '*$)} 

iAnd  Allah  gives  to  whom  He  wills  without  limit.} 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  Allah  gives  sustenance  to  whomever 
He  wills  of  His  servants  without  count  or  limit  in  this  and  the 
Hereafter.  A  Hadith  has  stated  (that  Allah  said): 

« JriU  jif  jjif 

«0  son  of  Adam!  Spend  (in  Allah’s  cause)  and  1  (Allah)  will 
spend  on  i/om.s111 


111  Al-Humaydi  2:459. 


587 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


The  Prophet  jg  said: 

iji  Ij*  ,_^»u  'Ij  J% 

»0  Bilal!  Spend  and  do  not  fear  deprivation  from  the  Owner  of 
the  Throne. 


Allah  said: 


/>>*>  ✓><  /  ,  *V.A 


i...and  whatsoever  you  spend  of  anything  (in  Allah's  cause), 

He  will  replace  it.}  (34:39) 

In  addition,  it  is  reported  in  the  SahOi  (that  the  Prophet  jg 
said): 


VaAv#  ■ia£- 1  J fy  . LL.'-J  1  j|8 

•  liij  IS' ... .t  .  Japl  jUjiil  :  ^>-Vl  J jZj  i  uL>- 


« Every  day  two  angels  come  down  from  heavens  and  one  of 
them  says,  'O  Allah!  Compensate  every  person  who  spends  in 
Your  cause,'  and  the  other  (angel)  says,  'O  Allah!  Destroy 
every  miser. ’u12 1 


Also  in  the  Sahih: 

C— -J  Uj  4  C. C.IS \  la  Vl  diJ l*  ^y>  diJ  J  .  VJ»  ^la  ! 

iSjl:}  vl-alii  4^^  i Sjy  cixitf  t»j 


*The  son  0/  Adam  says,  'My  money,  my  money!'  Yet,  what  is 
your  money  except  tlwt  which  you  eat  and  use  up,  wear  and 
tear,  and  spend  in  charity  and  thus  keep  (in  your  record). 
Other  than  that,  it  will  go  away  and  will  be  left  for  the  people 
(the  inheritors).^ 


In  addition,  Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  the  Prophet  jg  said: 


«iJ  Ji*  v  ijj  j  *3  ju  y  jij  uj  4^  j  is  n  ^  jis  dii» 


11 The  Dunya  (life  of  this  world)  is  the  residence  of  those  who 
have  no  residence,  the  wealth  of  those  who  have  no  wealth,  and 
it  is  harvested  by  those  who  have  no  sense  of  reason.  »(41 


111  At-Tabarani  10:192. 
121  Fath  Al-Bari  3 :357 . 
131  Muslim  4 :2273 . 

141  Ahmad  6:71. 


588 


Tafsir  Ibti  Kaffnr 


!*♦»*  4>l>  S^'  «»f  •j^’S  <*'  1&'i> 

l*  jJ>>  Si  »j»jS  *i)  *s»  vjJttf  l2j  <j  VyiSi-l  (jjUll  jj  j£**Ll 

*  <f&  &;  4%  ^  « !£Ss3  q  i^sis  ft  ^  {*  iidi 

^  J*>f  dl  *^4 


4223.  Mankind  was  one  community  and  Allah  sent  Prophets 
with  glad  tidings  and  warnings,  and  with  them  He  sent  down 
the  Scripture  in  truth  to  judge  between  people  in  matters 
wherein  they  differed.  And  only  those  to  whom  (the  Scripture) 
was  given  differed  concerning  it,  after  clear  proofs  had  come 
unto  them,  through  Iwtred,  one  to  another.  Then  Allah  by  His 
leave  guided  those  who  believed  to  the  truth  of  that  wherein 
they  differed.  And  Allah  guides  whom  He  wills  to  the  straight 
path 


Disputing,  after  the  Clear  Signs  have  come,  indicates 
Deviation 


Ibn  Jarir  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “There  were  ten 
generations  between  Adam  and  Nuh,  all  of  them  on  the 
religion  of  Truth.  They  later  disputed  so  Allah  sent  the 
Prophets  as  wamers  and  bringers  of  glad  tidings.”  He  then 
said  that  this  is  how  ‘Abdullah  read  the  Ayah: 

oJL*’! j  of  S* 0 1  U IS 


The  people  were  one  Ummah  and  they  then  disputed.111 


Al-Hakim  recorded  this  in  his  Mustadrak  find  said,  "Its 
chain  of  narrators  is  SahOx,  but  they  (Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim) 
did  not  record  it.”*21  Abu  Jafar  Razi  reported  that  Abu  Al- 
‘Aliyah  said  that  Ubayy  bin  Ka*b  read  the  Ayah  as: 


SJL^t j  *t-» I  ^.01  i)  15 


The  people  were  one  Ummah  and  they  then  disputed  and  Allah 
sent  the  Propltets  as  wamers  and  bringers  of  glad  tidings.131 

‘Abdur-Razzaq  said  that  Ma‘mar  said  that  Qatadah  said  that 


111  At-Tabari  4 :275 . 
121  Al-Hakim  2:546. 
131  At-Tabari  4:78. 


589 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (2 01  -  224)  (Part-2) 
Allah’s  statement: 

Z\ 


4 Mankind  was  one  community } 
means;  "They  all  had  the  guidance.  Then: 

jlll I  Jill  lyiii-U 

They  disputed  and  Allah  sent  Prophets. 

The  first  to  be  sent  was  Nuh."*1* 

‘Abdur-Razzaq  reported  that  Abu  Hurayrah  commented  on: 

44%  U  «  Q  !£« 


iThen  Allah  by  His  leave  guided  those  who  believed  to  the  truth 
of  that  wherein  they  differed.} 

saying  that  the  Prophet  jgg  said: 


jZ  tilAJl  'J J jl  fji  O jS/ I  Ojyjfl I 

^  4-3  t l  l»J  <U)I  UIJL £3  I’pAJjw  ^  0-i 

1-1*3  i  4-3  0  ^-.UlU  t  a]  I  IjljLp  4-3  1 1  t-X^3  l  4j% 

n^uai  ji  j 43  oJdb 


«We  are  f/ic  fast  (nation),  but  the  first  (foremost)  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection.  We  are  the  first  people  to  enter  Paradise,  although 
they  (Jews  and  Christians)  have  been  given  the  Book  before  us 
and  we  after  them.  Allah  has  guided  us  to  the  truth  wherever 
they  disputed  over  it.  This  is  the  day  (Friday)  that  they 
disputed  about,  Allah  guided  us  to  it.  So,  the  people  follow  us, 
as  tomorrow  is  for  the  Jews  and  the  day  after  is  for  the 
Christians 

Ibn  Wahb  related  that  ‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Zayd  bin  Aslam 
said  that  his  father  said  about  the  Ayah: 

44%  U  H.  tfSSl  Q  !£s  iif 

iThen  Allah  by  His  leave  guided  those  who  believed  to  the  truth 
of  that  wherein  they  differed .} 

They  disputed  about  the  day  of  Congregation  (Friday).  The 

111  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  1 :82. 

^  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  1 :82 . 


590 


Tafsir  Urn  Kathir 

Jews  made  it  Saturday  while  the  Christians  chose  Sunday. 
Allah  guided  the  Ummah  of  Muhammad  jg  to  Friday.  They  also 
disputed  about  the  true  Qiblah.  The  Christians  faced  the  east 
while  the  Jews  faced  Bayt  Al-Maqdis.  Allah  guided  the  Ummah 
of  Muhammad  sg  to  the  true  Qiblah  ( Ka‘bah  in  Makkah).  They 
also  disputed  about  the  prayer,  as  some  of  them  bow  down,  but 
do  not  prostrate,  while  others  prostrate,  but  do  not  bow  down. 
Some  of  them  pray  while  talking  and  some  while  walking.  Allah 
guided  the  Ummah  of  Muhammad  jg  to  the  truth.  They  also 
disputed  about  the  fast;  some  of  them  fast  during  a  part  of  the 
day,  while  others  fast  from  certain  types  of  foods.  Allah  guided 
the  Ummah  of  Muhammad  si  to  the  truth.  They  also  disputed 
about  Ibrahim.  The  Jews  said,  ‘He  was  a  Jew,’  while  the 
Christians  considered  him  Christian.  Allah  has  made  him  a 
Haniyfan  Musliman.  Allah  has  guided  the  Ummah  of 
Muhammad  sg  to  the  truth. 

They  also  disputed  about  ‘Isa.  The  Jews  rejected  him  and 
accused  his  mother  of  a  grave  sin,  while  the  Christians  made 
him  a  god  and  the  son  of  God.  Allah  made  him  by  His  Word 
and  a  spirit  from  (those  He  created)  Him.  Allah  guided  the 
Ummah  of  Muhammad  «g  to  the  truth.”111 

Allah  then  said: 

4.. . by  His  leave}  meaning,  “By  His  knowledge  of  them  and  by 
what  He  has  directed  and  guided  them  to,’  according  to  Ibn 
Jarir.*2'  Also: 

&& 

4 And  Allah  guides  whom  He  wills} 
means  from  among  His  creation.  (Allah  said:) 

4.. . to  the  straight  way}  meaning,  He  commands  the  decision  and 
the  clear  proof.  Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim  reported  that  ‘A’ishah 
narrated  that  when  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  used  to  wake  up  at 
night  to  pray,  he  would  say: 


*J*  At-Tabari  4 :284 . 
'2|  At-Tabari  4:286. 


Surat  2.  Al-Baaarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


591 


'r^JI  ‘t oij-wiu  vj  (*4^'" 

aJ  vla^l  UJ  Jjlil  <j  \J\S  Ui  ibl^  ^jf 

yj;.-A  J?l^»  Jj  til;  y>  vlu[  t  viUSij  j>Jl  ^ 


«0  Allah,  the  Lord  of  (angels)  Jibtil,  Mikd'it  and  Isrdfil, 
Creator  of  the  heavens  and  earth  and  Knower  of  the  seen  and 
the  unseen.  You  judge  between  Your  servants  regarding  what 
they  have  disputed  in,  so  guide  me  to  what  have  been  the 
subject  of  dispute  of  the  truth  by  Your  leave.  Indeed,  You  guide 
whom  You  will  to  the  straight  path, 


A  Du‘a  reads: 


V j  £*jjb  jkdi  Uji j  lipdi  tijjij  iii>-  £/\  ^jui» 

«UUj 


“O  Allah!  Show  us  the  truth  as  truth,  and  bestow  adherence  to 
it  on  us.  Show  us  the  evil  as  evil,  and  make  us  stay  away  from 
it,  and  do  not  confuse  us  regarding  the  reality  of  evil  so  that  we 
will  not  be  led  astray  by  it,  and  make  us  leaders  for  the 
believers  .s*2’ 


ifctit  gld  «  l£  -yil  j*i  £1;  \%  i^5?  \f 11  j  •» 


&  &  h ^ p&fr  ip:  i$j 


^224.  Or  think  you  that  you  will  enter  Paradise  without  such 
(trials)  as  came  to  those  who  passed  away  before  you?  They 
were  afflicted  with  severe  poverty  and  ailments  and  were  so 
shaken  that  even  the  Messenger  and  those  who  believed  along 
with  him  said,  "When  (will  come)  the  help  of  Allah?"  Yes! 
Certainly,  the  help  of  Allah  is  near!} 


Victory  only  comes  after  succeeding  in  the  Trials 

Allah  said: 

i pi  &  sp  }\} 

4 Or  think  you  that  you  will  enter  Paradise } 


Muslim  1 :534. 

121  Takhrij  Al-Ihya’  3:1418. 


592 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


before  you  are  tested  and  tried  just  like  the  nations  that  came 
before  you?  This  is  why  Allah  said: 


(S  & 


i... without  such  (trials)  as  came  to  those  who  passed  away 
before  you  ?  They  were  afflicted  with  severe  poverty  and 
ailments > 

meaning,  illnesses,  pain,  disasters  and  hardships.  Ibn  MasMd, 
Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Abu  Al-‘Aliyah,  Mujahid,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Murrah 
Al-Hamdani,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Ad-Dahhak,  Ar-Rabl‘,  As- 
Suddi  and  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  said  that 


iAl-Ba'sa'}  means  poverty.*1'  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that 


i...and  Ad-Darra'}  means  ailments. 


iand  were  so  shaken}  for  fear  of  the  enemy,  and  were  tested,  and 
put  to  a  tremendous  trial.  An  authentic  Hadith  narrated  that 
Khabbab  bin  Al-Aratt  said,  “We  said,  ‘O  Messenger  of  Allah! 
Why  do  you  not  invoke  Allah  to  support  us?  Why  do  you  not 
supplicate  to  Allah  for  us?’  He  said: 


J,))  fjA. <-.13  jlS  If  o!D 

V  i  AoJip- J  A^->J  Ua  Jb  JL>J  l  i?  LLa  Li  iaJL <*3>  N 

.  J*  JjUi 


«T7ie  saw  would  be  placed  on  the  middle  of  the  head  of  one  of 
those  who  were  before  you  (believers)  and  he  would  be  saiuti 
until  his  feet ,  and  he  zuould  be  combed  with  iron  combs  between 
his  skin  and  bones ,  yet  that  would  not  make  him  change  his 
religion J 

He  then  said: 


JUw  N  JyJl  jr-ri 

,  >  *  +  '  *  i  ' ,  *  *  5 


m 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2:616. 


593 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Parte} 


«By  Allah!  This  matter  (religion)  will  spread  (or  expand)  by 
Allah  until  the  traveler  leaves  Satt'a'  to  Hadramawt  (both  in 
Yemen,  but  at  a  great  distance  from  each  otlter)  fearing  only 
Allah  and  then  the  wolf  for  the  sake  of  his  sheep.  You  are  just  a 
hasty  peopled 
And  Allah  said: 


jluij  ijiii  ill'  jJi'-li 


iAlif-Ldm-Mim.  Do  people  think  that  they  will  be  left  alone 
because  they  say:  "We  believe,"  and  will  not  be  tested?  And 
We  indeed  tested  those  who  were  before  them.  And  Allah  will 
certainly  make  (it)  known  (the  truth  of)  those  who  are  true,  and 
will  certainly  make  (it)  known  (the  falsehood  of)  those  who  are 
liars.}  ( 29:1-3) 


The  Companions  experienced  tremendous  trials  during  the 
battle  of  Al-Ahzab  (the  Confederates).  Allah  said: 


oi jl—'  I >u  oi  fj’&r  # 

Zjgji  jj£  if,  1  &  oJiSj 

/  ^  //  .////  J  >>  / 


4W?ie/;  they  came  upon  you  from  above  you  and  from  belcno 
you,  and  when  the  eyes  grew  wild  and  the  hearts  reached  to  the 
throats,  and  you  were  harboring  doubts  about  Allah.  There,  the 
believers  were  tried  and  shaken  with  a  mighty  shaking.  And 
when  the  hypocrites  and  those  in  whose  hearts  is  a  disease  (of 
doubts)  said:  "Allah  and  His  Messenger  promised  us  nothing 
but  delusion!"}  (33:10-12) 

When  Heraclius  asked  Abu  Sufyan,  “Did  you  fight  him 
(Prophet  Muhammad)?”  He  said,  “Yes.”  Heraclius  said,  “What 
was  the  outcome  of  warfare  between  you?”  Abu  Sufyan  said, 
“Sometimes  we  lose  and  sometimes  he  loses.”  He  said,  “Such 
is  the  case  with  Prophets,  they  are  tested,  but  the  final  victory 
is  theirs.”121 

Allah’s  statement: 


111  Fath  Al-Bari  6:716. 
121  Fath  Al-Bari  9:25. 


594 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathri 


4... without  (such)  (trials)  as  came  to  those  who  passed  away 
before  you * 


meaning,  their  way  of  life.  Similarly,  Allah  said: 

4c$i\  &  li£  fa  13  RUty 


iThen  We  destroyed  men  stronger  (in  power)  than  these  -  and 
the  example  of  the  ancients  has  passed  away  (before  them)* 
(43:8)  and: 


4$  J*>  &  si'j  ifo*  jyu  fr- 

4 . .  .were  so  shaken  that  even  the  Messenger  and  those  wlw 
believed  along  with  him  said,  "When  (will  come)  the  help  of 
Allah."* 


They  pleaded  (to  Allah)  for  victory  against  their  enemies  and 
invoked  Him  for  aid  and  deliverance  from  their  hardships  and 
trials.  Allah  said: 


40  &  '0  ii 

4Yes!  Certainly,  the  help  of  Alldix  is  near!* 

Allah  said: 


40]A  £  4$ 


4Verily,  along  with  every  hardship  is  relief.  Verily,  along  with 
every  hardship  is  relief.*  (94:5,  6) 

So  just  as  there  is  hardship,  its  equal  of  relief  will  soon 
arrive.  This  is  why  Allah  said: 


40  $  ol  vty 


4Yes!  Certainly,  the  help  of  Allah  is  near!* 


$  0j>%  jy  j j  J23 t  j f  Zfa£  nU 

i*  ‘H  j*.  y  \j£L u  UJ  Jjs— li 


<235.  They  ask  you  (O  Muliammad  jg)  what  they  should 
spend.  Say:  " Whatever  you  spend  of  good  must  be  for  parents 
and  kindred  and  orphans  and  Al-Masdkin  (the  poor)  and  the 
wayfarer,  and  wlmtever  you  do  of  good  deeds,  truly,  Allah 


Surah  2 ,  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


595 


iJ)  ri  ^  fcnows  it  well."} 

•  .".4r 


'*'*'/*<  'i 

jjSi1i  AjL;.  4^i*' 

j  &{£»£.&■ 

<iXf&£}Vy\z=*£j 

S^fci£X^j^  $ 

^<>->J  \  ^  M  4» \j  A&1 

*J&\£  'o t^'olJ^\ 
o pt=CQc  '5^" 


Who  deserves  the 
Nafaqah  (Spending 
or  Charity) 

Muqatil  bin  Hayyan 
said  that  this  Ayah 
was  revealed  about 
the  voluntary 
charity.111  The  Ayah 
means,  They  ask  you 
(O  Muhammad  *j§) 
how  they  should 
spend,’  as  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
and  Mujahid  have 
'•*  11  stated.  So,  Allah 
explained  it  for  them, 
saying: 

c£jj>jkj  J±-  5i  c*  (j*^* 
$5  ffZ&i  t£S}i  zj%yi\ > 

^Say:  " Whatever  you 
spend  of  good  must  be 


for  parents  and  kindred  and  orphans  and  Al-Masakin  and  the 
wayfarer,”} 

meaning,  spend  it  on  these  categories  or  areas.  Similarly,  a 
Hadlth  states  (that  those  who  deserve  one’s  generosity  the 
most,  are): 

•duit  iliiii  p  ilu-ij  d&Sj  hrij  itfl* 


« Your  mother,  father,  sister,  brother,  the  closest  and  then  the 
farthest  (relatives)  .»|21 

Maymun  bin  Mihran  once  recited  this  Ayah  (2:215)  and 
commented,  “These  are  the  areas  of  spending.  Allah  did  not 
mention  among  them  the  drums,  pipe,  wooden  pictures,  or  the 


111  Ibn  AbiHatim  2:619. 
121  Al-Hakim  3:611. 


596 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 


curtains  that  cover  the  walls. 
Next,  Allah  said: 


^  j*. 


4 . .  .and  whatever  you  do  of  good  deeds,  truly,  Allah  knows  it  well . } 
meaning,  whatever  you  perform  of  good  works,  Allah  knows 
them  and  He  will  reward  you  for  them  in  the  best  manner,  no 
one  will  be  dealt  with  unjustly,  even  the  weight  of  an  atom. 


J  jij  ’“s—  i  o'  ilfj  j&I  jij 

CJS2  V  Jttj  fix  lifj  p3  %  £S  ljL£ 


4226.  Fighting  is  ordained  for  you  (Muslims)  though  you 
dislike  it,  and  it  may  be  that  you  dislike  a  thing  which  is  good 
for  you  and  that  you  like  a  thing  which  is  bad  for  you.  Allah 
knows  but  you  do  not  know.} 


Jihad  is  made  Obligatory 

In  this  Ayah,  Allah  made  it  obligatory  for  the  Muslims  to 
fight  in  Jihad  against  the  evil  of  the  enemy  who  transgress 
against  Islam.  Az-Zuhri  said,  “Jihad  is  required  from  every 
person,  whether  he  actually  joins  the  fighting  or  remains 
behind.  Whoever  remains  behind  is  required  to  give  support,  if 
support  is  warranted;  to  provide  aid,  if  aid  is  needed;  and  to 
march  forth,  if  he  is  commanded  to  do  so.  If  he  is  not  needed, 
then  he  remains  behind.”  It  is  reported  in  the  Sahih: 


l^l>-  <C~a  Olt  l  oU 


"Whoever  dies  but  neither  fought  (i.e.,  in  Allah's  cause),  nor 
sincerely  considered  fighting,  will  die  a  death  of  Jdhiliyyah  (pre- 
Isldmic  era  of  ignorance)  .»*2* 

On  the  day  of  Al-Fath  (when  he  conquered  Makkah),  the 
Prophet  said: 


Djjiid  pj  .f i  litj  iZj j  ,j£5j  jwOiJl  JL<o  N* 


"There  is  no  Hijrah  (migration  from  Makkah  to  Al-Madinah) 
after  the  victory,  but  only  Jihad  and  good  intention.  If  you  were 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :620. 
121  Muslim  3:1517. 


597 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


required  to  march  forth,  then  march  forth  .n1'1 
Allah’s  statement: 

ip 

4...  though  you  dislike  it}  means,  ‘Fighting  is  difficult  and  heavy 
on  your  hearts.’  Indeed,  fighting  is  as  the  Ayah  describes  it,  as 
it  includes  being  killed,  wounded,  striving  against  the  enemies 
and  enduring  the  hardship  of  travel.  Allah  then  said: 


i . .  .and  it  may  be  that  you  dislike  a  thing  which  is  good  for 
you} 

meaning,  fighting  is  followed  by  victory,  dominance  over  the 
enemy,  taking  over  their  lands,  money  and  offspring.  Allah 
continues: 


ip  J 


4 . .  .and  that  you  like  a  thing  which  is  bad  for  you .} 

This  Ayah  is  general  in  meaning.  Hence,  one  might  covet 
something,  yet  in  reality  it  is  not  good  or  beneficial  for  him, 
such  as  refraining  from  joining  the  Jihad,  for  it  might  lead  to 
the  enemy  taking  over  the  land  and  the  government.  Then, 
Allah  said: 


i^Jj^  -i  &'3  p  &j} 


4Allah  knows,  but  you  do  not  know.} 

meaning,  He  has  better  knowledge  than  you  of  how  things  will 
turn  out  to  be  in  the  end,  and  of  what  benefits  you  in  this 
earthly  life  and  the  Hereafter.  Hence,  obey  Him  and  adhere  to 
His  commands,  so  that  you  may  acquire  the  true  guidance. 


Pp=S  'J-  jJf  *J»  J\Si  ji  *J>  JG  p  jfc 


'is  «  ’SM  ^  &  Hi  gb)S  && 

'l+Z  j 'S  ££$  $4k  Cjlt  4  cXi 


^  FathAl-Bari  4:56. 


598 


Tafsir  ton  Kqthtr 


y!t* 

jy*'  ^'j  y* 


i217.  They  ask  you  concerning  fighting  in  the  Sacred  Months. 
Say,  " Fighting  therein  is  a  great  (transgression)  but  a  greater 
(transgression)  with  Allah  is  to  prevent  mankind  from  following 
the  way  of  Allah,  to  disbelieve  in  Him,  to  prevent  access  to  Al- 
Masjid  Al-Hardm  (at  Makkah),  and  to  drive  out  its  inhabitants, 
and  Al-Fitnah  is  worse  than  killing/'  And  they  will  never  cease 
fighting  you  until  they  turn  you  back  from  your  religion 
(Islamic  Monotheism)  if  they  can.  And  whosoever  of  you  turns 
back  from  his  religion  and  dies  as  a  disbeliever,  then  his  deeds 
will  be  lost  in  this  life  and  in  the  Hereafter,  and  they  will  be  the 
dwellers  of  the  Fire.  They  will  abide  therein  forever.} 

4218.  Verily,  those  who  have  believed,  and  those  who  have 
emigrated  (for  Allah’s  religion)  and  have  striven  hard  in  the 
way  of  Allah,  all  these  hope  for  Allah's  mercy.  And  Allah  is 
OJi-Forgiving,  Most-Merciful.} 


The  Nakhlah  Military  Maneuvers,  and  the  Ruling  on 
Fighting  during  the  Sacred  Months 

Ibn  Abu  Hatim  reported  that  Jundub  bin  ‘Abdullah  said: 
Allah’s  Messenger  assembled  a  group  of  men  under  the 
command  of  Abu  ‘Ubaydah  bin  Jarrah.  When  he  was  about  to 
march,  he  started  crying  for  the  thought  of  missing  Allah’s 
Messenger  jgj.  Consequently,  the  Messenger  s§  relieved  Abu 
‘Ubaydah  from  command,  appointed  ‘Abdullah  bin  Jahsh 
instead,  gave  him  some  written  instructions  and  commanded 
him  not  to  read  the  instructions  until  he  reached  such  and 
such  area.  He  also  said  to  ‘Abdullah: 

^  iUi  p,\  Jj.  ijU.f  it 

«Do  not  compel  any  of  your  men  to  continue  marching  with 
you  thereafter .» 

When  ‘Abdullah  read  the  instructions,  he  recited  Istirja ‘ 
[saying,  Trulyl  to  Allah  we  belong  and  truly,  to  Him  we  shall 
return’;  and  refer  to  (2:156)]  and  said,  “I  hear  and  obey  Allah 
and  His  Messenger.”  He  then  told  his  companions  the  story 
and  read  the  instructions  to  them,  and  two  men  went  back 
while  the  rest  remained.  Soon  after,  they  found  Ibn  Hadrami 


599 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


(one  of  the  disbelievers  of  Quraysh)  and  killed  him  not 
knowing  that  that  day  was  in  Rajab  or  Jumadi  (where  Rajab 
is  the  Sacred  Month).  The  polytheists  said  to  the  Muslims, 
“You  have  committed  murder  in  the  Sacred  Month.”  Allah  then 
revealed: 


<77iei/  <jsfc  you  concerning  fighting  in  the  Sacred  Months.  Say, 
"Fighting  therein  is  a  great  (transgression)..."^ 

Abdul-Malik  bin  Hisham,  who  compiled  the  Sirah  (life  story 
of  the  Prophet  sg),  related  that  Ziyad  bin  'Abdullah  Bakka’i  said 
that  Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  bin  Yasar  Al-Madani  wrote  in  his 
book  on  the  Sirah,  “Allah’s  Messenger  jg  sent  'Abdullah  bin 
Jahsh  bin  Riyab  Al-Asadi  in  Rajab,  after  he  (the  Prophet  §g) 
came  back  from  the  first  battle  of  Badr.  The  Prophet  jg  sent 
eight  people  with  him,  all  from  among  the  MuhajirQn  and  none 
from  the  Ansar.  He  also  gave  him  some  written  instructions 
and  ordered  him  not  to  read  them  until  he  marched  for  two 
days.  ‘Abdullah  should  then  read  the  instructions  and  march  to 
implement  them,  but  should  not  force  any  of  those  who  were 
with  him  to  accompany  him. 

The  companions  of  ‘Abdullah  bin  Jahsh  were  all  from  the 
Muhajirun,  from  the  tribe  of  Banu  ‘Abd  Shams  bin  ‘Abd 
Manaf,  there  was  Abu  Hudhayfah  bin  ‘Utbah  bin  Rabi'ah  bin 
‘Abd  Shams  bin  ‘Abd  Manaf.  From  their  allies,  there  was 
‘Abdullah  bin  Jahsh,  who  was  the  commander  of  the  army 
unit,  and  ‘Ukkashah  bin  Mihsan  from  the  tribe  of  Banu  Asad 
bin  Khuzaymah.  From  the  tribe  of  Banu  Nawfal  bin  ‘Abd 
Manaf,  there  was  “Utbah  bin  Ghazwan  bin  Jabir,  one  of  their 
allies.  From  the  tribe  of  Banu  Zuhrah  bin  Kilab,  there  was 
Sa‘d  bin  Abu  Waqqas.  From  Banu  Ka*b,  there  were  their  allies: 
‘Adi  bin  ‘Amr  bin  Ar-RabPah  not  from  the  tribe  of  Ibn  Wa’il; 
W&qid  bin  ‘Abdullah  bin  ‘Abd  Manaf  bin  ‘Ann  bin  Thalabah 
bin  Yarbu'  from  Banu  Tamlm;  and  Khalid  bin  Bukair  from  the 
tribe  of  Banu  Sa‘d  bin  Layth,  Suhayl  bin  Bayda’  from  Banu 
Al-Harith  bin  Fihr  was  also  among  them.  When  ‘Abdullah  bin 
Jahsh  marched  for  two  days,  he  opened  and  read  the 


I1*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2:628. 


600 


Tafsir  Ibti  Kathir 

(Prophet’s)  instructions,  “When  you  read  these  instructions, 
march  until  you  set  camp  at  Nakhlah  between  Makkah  and 
At-Ta’if.  There,  watch  the  movements  of  the  caravan  of 
Quraysh  and  collect  news  about  them  for  us.”  When  ‘Abdullah 
bin  Jahsh  read  the  document,  he  said,  “I  hear  and  obey.”  He 
then  said  to  his  companions,  “Allah’s  Messenger  jfe  has 
commanded  me  to  march  forth  to  Nakhlah  to  watch  the 
movements  of  the  caravan  of  Quraysh  and  to  inform  him  about 
their  news.  He  has  prohibited  me  from  forcing  any  of  you  (to  go 
with  me).  So,  those  who  seek  martyrdom,  they  should  march 
with  me.  Those  who  dislike  the  idea  of  martyrdom,  let  them 
turn  back.  Surely,  I  will  implement  the  command  of  Allah’s 
Messenger  sfe.”  He  and  his  companions  continued  without  any 
of  them  turning  back. 

‘Abdullah  entered  the  Hijaz  area  (western  Arabia)  until  he 
reached  an  area  called  Buhran,  close  to  Furu‘.  There,  Sa‘d  bin 
Abu  Waqqas  and  ‘Utbah  bin  Ghazwan  lost  the  camel  that  they 
were  riding  in  turns,  and  they  went  back  to  search  for  it  while 
‘Abdullah  bin  Jahsh  and  the  rest  of  his  companions  continued 
until  they  reached  Nakhlah.  Then,  a  caravan  belonging  to  the 
Quraysh  passed  by  carrying  raisins,  food  stuff  and  some  trade 
items  for  the  Quraysh.  ‘Amr  bin  Hadrami,  whose  name  was 
‘Abdullah  bin  ‘Abbad,  was  in  the  caravan,  as  well  as  ‘Uthman 
bin  ‘Abdullah  bin  Al-Mughlrah  and  his  brother  Nawfal  bin 
‘Abdullah  from  the  tribe  of  Makhzum,  and  Al-Hakam  bin 
Kaysan,  a  freed  slave  of  Hisham  bin  Al-Mughlrah.  When  they 
saw  the  Companions  they  were  frightened,  but  when  they  saw 
TJkkashah  bin  Mihsan  their  fears  subsided,  since  his  head 
was  shaved.  They  said,  “These  people  seek  the  ‘Umrah,  so 
there  is  no  need  to  fear  them.” 

The  Companions  conferred  among  themselves.  That  day  was 
the  last  day  in  the  (sacred)  month  of  Rajab.  They  said  to  each 
other,  “By  Allah!  If  you  let  them  pass,  they  will  soon  enter  the 
Sacred  Area  and  take  refuge  in  it  from  you.  If  you  kill  them, 
you  will  kill  them  during  the  Sacred  Month.”  They  at  first 
hesitated  and  did  not  like  to  attack  them.  They  then  began 
encouraging  themselves  and  decided  to  kill  whomever  they 
could  among  the  disbelievers  and  to  confiscate  whatever  they 
had.  Hence,  Waqid  bin  ‘Abdullah  At-Tamlmi  shot  an  arrow  at 
‘Amr  bin  Al-Hadrami  and  killed  him.  “Uthman  bin  ‘Abdullah 


601 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224 )  (Part-2) 


and  Al-Hakam  bin  Kaysan  gave  themselves  up,  while  Nawfal 
bin  ‘Abdullah  was  able  to  outrun  them  in  flight.  Later  on, 
‘Abdullah  bin  Jahsh  and  his  companions  went  back  to  Allah’s 
Messenger  jg  in  Al-Madlnah  with  the  caravan  and  the  two 
prisoners. 

Ibn  Ishaq  went  on:  I  was  told  that  some  members  of  the 
family  of  ‘Abdullah  bin  Jahsh  said  that  ‘Abdullah  said  to  his 
companions:  “Allah’s  Messenger  jg  will  have  one-fifth  of  what 
we  have  confiscated.”  This  occurred  before  Allah  required  one- 
fifth  for  His  Messenger  from  the  war  booty.  So,  ‘Abdullah 
designated  one-fifth  of  the  caravan  for  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  and 
divided  the  rest  among  his  companions.  Ibn  Ishaq  also  stated 
that  at  first,  when  the  Sariyah  came  back  to  Allah’s  Messenger 
3g,  he  said  to  them: 

I  J  Jl£i. 

«/  have  not  commanded  you  to  conduct  warfare  during  the 
Sacred  Month.* 


He  left  the  caravan  and  the  two  prisoners  alone  and  did  not 
take  any  share  of  the  war  booty. 

When  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  did  that,  the  soldiers  from  the 
attack  were  concerned  and  felt  that  they  were  destroyed,  and 
their  Muslim  brethren  criticized  them  for  what  they  did.  The 
Quraysh  said  that  Muhammad  jg  and  his  Companions  violated 
the  sanctity  of  the  Sacred  Month  and  shed  blood,  confiscated 
property  and  took  prisoners  during  it.  Those  who  refuted  them 
among  the  Muslims  who  remained  in  Makkah  replied  that  the 
Muslims  had  done  that  during  the  month  of  Shaman  (which  is 
not  a  sacred  month).  Meanwhile,  the  Jews  were  pleased  about 
what  happened  to  Allah’s  Messenger  iff,.  They  said,  ‘  Amr  bin 
Hadrami  was  killed  by  Waqid  bin  ‘Abdullah:  'Amr,  means  the 
war  has  started,  Hadrami  means  the  war  has  come,  as  for 
Waqid  (bin  ‘Abdullah):  the  war  has  raged  (using  some  of  the 
literal  meanings  of  these  names  to  support  their  fortune¬ 
telling!).”  But,  Allah  made  all  that  turn  against  them. 

The  people  continued  talking  about  this  matter,  then  Allah 
revealed  to  His  Messenger  jg: 


vf-  ‘jJf  3tSi  ji  Jla  if- 

_rC^=>1  <it  Xj-  jSt 


602 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathtr 

iThey  ask  you  concerning  fighting  in  the  Sacred  Months.  Say, 

" Fighting  therein  is  a  great  (transgression)  but  a  greater 
(transgression)  with  Allah  is  to  prevent  mankind  from  following 
the  way  of  Allah,  to  disbelieve  in  Him,  to  prevent  access  to  Al- 
Masjid  Al-liardm  (at  Makkah),  and  to  drive  out  its  inhabitants, 
and  Al-Fitnah  is  xuorse  than  killing .} 

This  Ayah  means,  If  you  had  killed  during  the  Sacred 
Month,  they  (disbelievers  of  Quraysh)  have  hindered  you  from 
the  path  of  Allah  and  disbelieved  in  it.  They  also  prevented 
you  from  entering  the  Sacred  Mosque,  and  expelled  you  from 
it,  while  you  are  its  people, 

4'2  i, 


4... a  greater  (transgression)  with  Allah}  than  killing  whom  you 
killed  among  them.  Also: 


4p\  is  #-1 


4... and  Al-Fitnah  is  worse  than  killing.} 


means,  trying  to  force  the  Muslims  to  revert  from  their  religion 
and  re-embrace  Ku.fr  after  they  had  believed,  is  worse  with 
Allah  than  killing.’  Allah  said: 


4\y&-J  ^  if-  ^j} 


4And  they  will  never  cease  fighting  you  until  they  turn  you 
back  from  your  religion  (Islamic  Monotheism)  if  they  can.} 

So,  they  will  go  on  fighting  you  with  unrelenting  viciousness. 

Ibn  Ishaq  went  on:  When  the  Qur’an  touched  this  subject 
and  Allah  brought  relief  to  the  Muslims  instead  of  the  sadness 
that  had  befallen  them,  Allah’s  Messenger  took  possession 
of  the  caravan  and  the  two  prisoners.  The  Quraysh  offered  to 
ransom  the  two  prisoners,  TJthman  bin  ‘Abdullah  and  Hakam 
bin  Kaysan.  Allah’s  Messenger  said: 


•  LL>-Li>  ZlL  jlSLijjj  v» 


will  not  accept  your  ransom  until  our  two  companions 
return  safely .» 

meaning  Sa‘d  bin  Abu  Waqqas  and  TJtbah  bin  Ghazwan,  “For 
we  fear  for  their  safety  with  you.  If  you  kill  them,  we  will  kill 
your  people.”  Later  on,  Sa‘d  and  TJtbah  returned  safely  and 


603 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


Allah’s  Messenger  jg 
accepted  the 
Quraysh’s  ransom  for 
their  prisoners.  As  for 
Al-Hakam  bin 
Kaysan,  he  became 
Muslim  and  his  Islam 
strengthened.  He 
remained  with  Allah’s 
Messenger  jg  until  he 
was  martyred  during 
the  incident  at  Bir 
Ma'Onah  (when  the 
Prophet  m  sent 
seventy  Companions 
to  Najd  to  teach  them 
Islam,  but  Banu 
Sulaim  killed  them  all 
except  two).  As  for 
‘Uthman  bin 
‘Abdullah,  he  went 
back  to  Makkah  and 
died  there  as  a 
disbeliever. 

Ibn  Ishaq  went  on: 
When  ‘Abdullah  bin 
Jahsh  and  his  companions  were  relieved  from  their 
depressing  thoughts  after  the  Qur’an  was  revealed  about  this 
subject,  they  sought  the  reward  of  the  fighters  (in  Allah’s  way). 
They  said,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah!  We  wish  that  this  incident 
be  considered  a  battle  for  us,  so  that  we  gain  the  rewards  of 
the  Mujahidin.”  Then,  Allah  revealed: 


+)  A 


ro 

*  AjjJj  \  Aillj  y-JC 

O Off) *■  Cj^J 

i iirj 

\x£  \ s  ||} 


»  A  .\*A\ 


%  ‘if  5JZ  JUtf  if  j  S-ifj  \pz  Si> 


iVerily,  those  who  have  believed,  and  those  who  have  emigrated 
(for  Allah's  religion)  and  have  striven  hard  in  the  way  of  Allah, 
all  these  hope  for  Allah’s  mercy.  And  Allah  is  Oft-Forgiving, 
Most  Merciful .> 


604 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 


Hence,  Allah  has  greatly  elevated  their  hopes  of  gaining  what 
they  had  wished  for.111 


K&&  Vi  tfi  $  &&  ft* 

igb  P  if  <g.  &££  Ji  $£*!  I'iC  o* 

ois  ^  j;  ^  ajssj  teJtj  gif  4  ^Ea 

^  if  ffeli-V  if  &  4plif  Oi  JL^iif  ^  if;  ££$ 


4229.  They  ask  you  (O  Muhammad  jg)  concerning  alcoholic 
drink  and  gambling.  Say:  "In  them  is  a  great  sin,  and  (some) 
benefits  for  men,  but  the  sin  of  them  is  greater  than  their 
benefit."  And  they  ask  you  what  they  ought  to  spend.  Say: 
" That  which  is  (spare)  beyond  your  needs."  Thus  Allah  makes 
clear  to  you  His  Laws  in  order  that  you  may  give  thought.} 

4220.  In  (to)  this  worldly  life  and  in  the  Hereafter.  And  they 
ask  you  concerning  orphans.  Say:  "The  best  thing  is  to  work 
honestly  in  their  property,  and  if  you  mix  your  affairs  with 
theirs,  then  they  are  your  brothers.  And  Allah  knows  (the  one) 
who  means  mischief  (e.g.,  to  swallow  their  property)  from  (the 
one)  who  means  good  (e.g.,  to  save  their  property).  And  if 
Allah  had  wished,  He  could  have  put  you  into  difficulties. 
Truly,  Allah  is  All-Mighty,  All-Wise."} 


The  Gradual  Prohibition  of  Khamr  (Alchoholic  Drink) 

Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Abu  Maysarah  said  that  ‘Umar 
once  said,  “O  Allah!  Give  us  a  clear  ruling  regarding  Al- 
KhamrF’  Allah  sent  down  the  Ayah  of  Surat  Al-Baqarah. 

pi  lljj  j»  ppij  P&  &&& 

4 They  ask  you  (O  Multammad  M)  concerning  alcoholic  drink 
and  gambling.  Say:  "In  them  is  a  great  sin...} 

‘Umar  was  then  summoned  and  the  Ayah  was  recited  to 
him.  Yet,  he  still  said,  “O  Allah!  Give  us  a  clear  ruling 
regarding  Al-Khamr.”  Then,  this  Ayah  that  is  in  Surat  An- 
Nisa’  was  revealed: 


m 


Ibn  Hisham  2 :2 52-255. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


605 


icsj&  2%  v^\  *J  l£K  -jit 


yow  who  believe!  Approach  not  As-Saldh  (the  prayer)  when 
you  are  in  a  drunken  state.}  (4:43) 

Then,  when  the  prayer  was  called  for,  a  person  used  to 
herald  on  behalf  of  Allah’s  Messenger  jg,  “No  drunk  person 
should  attend  the  prayer.”  TJmar  was  summoned  again  and  the 
Ayah  was  recited  to  him.  Yet,  he  still  said,  “O  Allah!  Give  us  a 
clear  ruling  regarding  Al-Khamr.”  Then,  the  Ayah  that  is  in 
Surat  Al-Ma’idah  was  revealed,  TJmar  was  again  summoned 
and  the  Ayah  was  recited  to  him.  When  he  reached: 

fit 

iSo,  will  you  not  then  abstain ?}  (5:91) 

he  said,  “We  did  abstain,  we  did  abstain.”*11  This  is  also  the 
narration  that  Abu  Dawud,  At-Tirmidhi  and  An-Nasal  collected 
in  their  books.*2*  ‘Ali  bin  Al-Madlni  and  At-Tirmidhi  said  that 
the  chain  of  narrators  for  this  Hadith  is  sound  and  authentic. 
We  will  mention  this  Hadith  again  along  with  what  Imam 
Ahmad  collected  by  Abu  Hurayrah  Allah’s  saying  in  Surat  Al- 
Ma’idah: 


i-,^4  pi  p  ^  iuVS  jaf 


ilntoxicants  and  gambling,  and  Al-Ansab,131  and  Al-Azldm141 
are  an  abomination  of  Satan's  handiwork.  So  avoid  (strictly  all) 
that  (abomination)  in  order  that  you  may  be  successful.}  (5:90) 
Allah  said: 


£&} 

iThey  ask  you  (O  Muhammad  &)  concerning  alcoholic  drinks 
and  gambling.} 

As  for  Al-Khamr,  TJmar  bin  Khattab,  the  Leader  of  the 
faithful,  used  to  say,  “It  includes  ail  what  intoxicates  the 
mind.”  We  will  also  mention  this  statement  in  the  explanation 


*J*  Ahmad  1 :531 . 

*2*  Abu  Dawud  4 :79 ,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8 :415 ,  An-Nasal  8 :287 . 
*3*  Altars  upon  which  animals  were  sacrificed  for  other  than  Allah 
*4*  Arrows  used  for  divination. 


606 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

of  Surat  Al-Ma’idah,  along  with  the  topic  of  gambling.1'1 
Allah  said: 


rH 


iSay:  In  them  is  a  great  sin,  and  (some)  benefits  for  men.} 

As  for  the  harm  that  the  Khamr  and  gambling  cause,  it 
effects  the  religion.  As  for  their  benefit,  it  is  material,  including 
benefit  for  the  body,  digesting  the  food,  getting  rid  of  the 
excrements,  sharpening  the  mind,  bringing  about  a  joyous 
sensation  and  financially  benefiting  from  their  sale.  Also,  (their 
benefit  includes)  earnings  through  gambling  that  one  uses  to 
spend  on  his  family  and  on  himself.  Yet,  these  benefits  are 
outweighed  by  the  clear  harm  that  they  cause  which  affects 
the  mind  and  the  religion.  This  is  why  Allah  said: 

ii  jj  t+lll j} 


4... but  the  sin  of  them  is  greater  than  their  benefit .} 

This  Ayah  was  the  beginning  of  the  process  of  prohibiting 
Khamr,  not  explicity,  but  it  only  implied  this  meaning.  So 
when  this  Ayah  was  recited  to  ‘Umar,  he  still  said,  “O  Allah! 
Give  us  a  clear  ruling  regarding  Al-Khamr."  Soon  after,  Allah 
sent  down  a  clear  prohibition  of  Khamr  in  Surat  Al-Md’idah: 


fix  $z  &  jUy  jgft  iuV5  j£j(;  (\ 

y  pS  4  Q£X  pz  ol 

T  sfXi\  Jilt  Jl 


40  you  who  believe!  Intoxicants  (all  kinds  of  alcoholic  drinks), 
and  gambling,  and  Al-Ansab,  and  Al-Azldm  are  an 
abomination  of  Shay  tan's  handiwork.  So  avoid  (strictly  all)  that 
(abomination)  in  order  that  you  may  be  successful.  Shay  tan 
wants  only  to  excite  enmity  and  hatred  between  you  with 
intoxicants  (alcoholic  drinks)  and  gambling,  and  hinder  you 
from  the  remembrance  of  Allah  and  from  As-Salah  (the  prayer). 

So,  will  you  not  then  abstain?}  (5:90,  9 1)1^* 

We  will  mention  this  subject,  by  the  will  of  Allah,  when  we 


111  Ahmad  2:351. 

I21  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :636. 


607 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (2 01  -  224)  (Part-2) 

explain  Surat  Al-Ma’idah. 

Ibn  Umar,  Ash-Sha^i,  Mujahid,  Qatadah,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas 
and  ‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Aslam  stated  that  the  first  Ayah 
revealed  about  Khamr  was:  ^ 

4  ji  ^—111  >j  fSi\  _  . 

<77iey  asA:  you  about  Khamr  and  gambling.  Say:  ", In  them 
there  is  great  sin  .")  (2:219) 

Then,  the  Ayah  in  Surat  An-Nisa’  was  revealed  (on  this 
subject)  and  then  the  Ayah  in  Sdrat  Al-Ma’idah  which 
prohibited  Khamr .I'1 

Spending  whatever  One  could  spare  of  his  Money  on 
Charity 

Allah  said: 


iAnd  they  ask  you  what  they  ought  to  spend.  Say:  " That 
which  is  (spare)  beyond  your  needs.") 

Al-tfakam  said  that  Miqsam  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that 
this  Ayah  means,  whatever  you  can  spare  above  the  needs  of 
your  family.  This  is  also  the  opinion  of  Ibn  TJmar,  Mujahid, 
‘Ata’,  Ikrimah,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Muhammad  bin  Ka*b,  Al- 
Hasan,  Qatadah,  Al-Q&sim,  Salim,  ‘Ata’  Al-Khurasani  and  Ar- 
RabT  bin  Anas.121 

Ibn  Jarir  related  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  a  man  said, 
“O  Messenger  of  Allah!  I  have  a  Dinar  (a  currency).”  The 
Prophet  sg  said: 

“Spend  it  you  on  yourself  J  He  said,  “I  have  another  Dinar.”  He 
said: 


“Spend  it  on  your  wife.*  He  said,  “I  have  another  Dinar.”  He 
said: 


111  At-Tabari  4:331-336. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :656-657. 


608 


Tajsir  Ibn  Kathir 


ii Spend  if  on  your  offspring .»  He  said,  “I  have  another  Dinar.” 
He  said: 


«Yon  /«n>e  better  knowledge  (meaning  how  and  where  to  spend 
it  in  charity) 

Muslim  also  recorded  this  Hadith  in  his  Sahih. 

Muslim  recorded  that  Jabir  said  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jg 
said  to  a  man: 


iiuf  If  xir-  ^  jjlJl  li> 

l-iS^  ilily  tSi  If  jb  lilily 


“Start  with  yourself  and  grant  it  some  charity.  If  anything 
remains,  then  spend  it  on  your  family.  If  anything  remains, 
then  spend  it  on  your  relatives.  If  anything  remains,  then 
spend  it  like  this  and  like  that  (i.e.,  on  various  charitable 
purposes)  .»,a| 


A  Hadith  states: 

JS  lib  ^  isLI;  l\j  lib  ‘Jf  jiiji  JJu:  M  ibj 

•oils 


«0  son  0/  Adam!  If  you  spend  whatever  you  can  spare,  it 
would  be  better  for  you;  but  if  you  keep  it,  it  would  be  worse 
for  you.  You  shall  not  be  blamed  for  whatever  is  barely 
sufficient  M3* 

Allah  said: 


ii'^%  Qt if  4  § ,i-Ja  *$?i  ft  i\  ig 


ijhus  Allah  makes  clear  to  you  His  Ayat  in  order  that  you 
may  give  thought.  In  (to)  this  worldly  life  and  in  the 
Hereafter .)> 


meaning,  just  as  He  stated  and  explained  these 
commandments  for  you,  He  also  explains  the  rest  of  His  Ayat 


(1>  At-Tabari  4:340. 

Muslim  2 :692 . 

131  Muslim  no. 1036. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


609 


regarding  the  commandments  and  His  promises  and  warnings, 
so  that  you  might  give  thought  in  this  life  and  the  Hereafter. 
‘Ali  bin  Abu  Talhah  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented,  “Meaning 
about  the  imminent  demise  and  the  brevity  of  this  life,  and  the 
imminent  commencement  of  the  Hereafter  and  its 
continuity.”'1! 


Maintaining  the  Orphan’s  Property 

Allah  said: 


j-  — (4*d  o|j  jji.  ^  ji  y-Ji  y 

if  its  jj; 

f/iey  as/c  you  concerning  orphans.  Say:  "The  best  thing  is 
to  work  honestly  in  their  property,  and  if  you  mix  your  affairs 
with  theirs,  then  they  are  your  brothers.  And  Allah  knows  him 
who  means  mischief  (e.g.,  to  swallow  their  property)  from  him 
who  means  good  (e.g.,  to  save  their  property).  And  if  Allah 
had  wished.  He  could  have  put  you  into  difficulties.} 

Ibn  Jarir  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “When  the  Aydt 


$And  come  not  near  to  the  orphan’s  property,  except  to 
improve  it.}  (6:152)  and 


4  oM  Ciii 


t\} 


iVerily,  those  who  unjustly  eat  up  the  property  of  orphans, 
they  eat  up  only  fire  into  their  bellies,  and  they  will  be  burnt  in 
the  blazing  Fire!}  (4:10) 


were  revealed,  those  who  took  care  of  some  orphans,  separated 
their  food  and  drink  from  the  orphans’  food  and  drink.  When 
some  of  the  orphans’  food  and  drink  remained,  they  would 
keep  it  for  them  until  they  eat  it  or  otherwise  get  spoiled.  This 
situation  was  difficult  for  them  and  they  mentioned  this 
subject  to  Allah’s  Messenger  jg. 


m 


At-Jabari  4:348. 


610 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathy: 


ipw  ois  %  $  s 


iAnd  they  ask  you  concerning  orphans.  Say:  " The  best  thing  is 
to  work  honestly  in  their  property,  and  if  you  mix  your  affairs 
ivith  theirs,  then  they  are  your  brothers > 

Hence,  they  joined  their  food  and  drink  with  the  food  and 
drink  of  the  orphans.”*11  This  Hadith  was  also  collected  by 
Abu  DawQd,  An-Nasal  and  Al-Hakim  in  his  Mustadrak.l2] 
Several  others  said  similarly  about  the  circumstances 
surrounding  the  revelation  of  the  Ayah  (2:220),  including 
Mujahid,  ‘Ata’,  Ash-Shahi,  Ibn  Abu  Layla,  Qatadah  and  others 
among  the  Salaf  and  those  after  them.*3* 

Ibn  Jarir  reported  that  ‘A’ishah  said,  “I  dislike  that  an 
orphan’s  money  be  under  my  care,  unless  I  mix  my  food  with 
his  food  and  my  drink  with  his  drink.”*4* 

Allah  said: 

<% 


iSay:  The  best  thing  is  to  ivork  honestly  in  their  property. > 
meaning,  on  the  one  hand  (i.e.,  this  is  required  in  any  case). 
Allah  then  said: 

4  i**jMli* 


i...and  if  you  mix  your  affairs  with  theirs,  then  tlmy  are  your 
brothers.} 

meaning,  there  is  no  harm  if  you  mix  your  food  and  drink 
with  their  food  and  drink,  since  they  are  your  brothers  in  the 
religion.  This  is  why  Allah  said  afterwards: 

iAnd  Allah  ktunvs  (the  one)  zvho  means  mischief  (e.g.,  to 
swallow  their  property)  from  (tlte  one)  who  means  good  (e.g.,  to 
save  their  property).} 

meaning,  He  knows  those  whose  intent  is  to  cause  mischief  or 
righteousness.  He  also  said: 

*‘*  At-Tabari  4:350. 

*2*  Abu  Dawud  3 :291 ,  An-Nasal  6 :256  and  Al-Hakim  2  : 103 . 

*3*  At-Tabari  4 :350-353 . 

*4*  At-Tabari  4 :  :355 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Bagarali  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


6U 


«a>  ol  iit  ili  y)} 


iAnd  if  Allah  had  wished,  He  could  have  put  you  into 
difficulties.  Truly,  Allah  is  All-Mighty,  All-Wise} 

meaning,  if  Allah  wills.  He  will  make  this  matter  difficult  for 
you.  But,  He  made  it  easy  for  you,  and  allowed  you  to  mix 
your  affairs  with  the  orphans’  affairs  in  a  way  that  is  better. 
Similarly,  Allah  said: 


iAnd  come  not  near  to  the  orphan's  propertx/,  except  to 
improve  it.}  { 6:152) 


Allah  has  thus  allowed  spending  from  the  orphan’s  estate  by 
its  executor,  in  reasonable  proportions,  on  the  condition  that 
he  has  the  intention  to  compensate  the  orphan  later  on,  when 
he  can  afford  it.  We  will  mention  about  it  in  detail  in  Surat  An- 
Nisa’  by  Allah’s  will. 


X  *>■?  3$  jj;  ijs  ji  ^  Ujj  £ 

^  (*<£■)  iJc-jj  i&fc 


<(222.  And  do  nof  marry  Al-Mushrikdt  (idolatresses)  till  they 
believe  (worship  Allah  Alone).  And  ittdeed  a  slave  woman  who 
believes  is  better  than  a  (free)  Mushrikah  (idolatress),  even 
though  she  pleases  you.  And  give  not  (your  daughters)  in 
marriage  to  Al-Mushrikfn  till  the y  believe  (in  Allah  Alone)  and 
verily,  a  believing  servant  is  better  than  a  (free)  Mushrik 
(idolator),  even  though  he  pleases  you.  Those  (Mushrikin)  invite 
you  to  the  Fire,  but  Allah  invites  (you)  to  Paradise  and 
forgiveness  by  His  leave,  and  makes  His  Aydt  (proofs, 
evidences,  verses,  lessons,  signs,  revelations,  etc.)  Hear  to 
mankind  that  they  may  remember .} 


The  Prohibition  of  marrying  Mushrik  Men  and  Women 

Allah  prohibited  the  believers  from  marrying  Mushrik  women 
who  worship  idols.  Although  the  meaning  is  general  and 
includes  every  Mushrik  woman  from  among  the  idol 
worshippers  and  the  People  of  the  Scripture,  Allah  excluded 


612 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathir 


the  People  of  the  Scripture  from  this  ruling.  Allah  stated: 


j5*  UW^- 


^  0  Jt  &  c#  *  > 


4(Laivful  to  you  in  marriage)  are  chaste  women  front  those  who 
were  given  the  Scripture  (Jeivs  ami  Christians)  before  your  time 
lohen  you  have  given  their  due  dowry,  desiring  chastity  (i.e., 
taking  them  in  legal  wedlock)  not  committing  illegal  sexual 
intercourse.}  (5:5) 

‘Ali  bin  Abu  Talhah  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  about  what 
Allah  said: 


4And  do  not  marry  Al-Mushrikdt  (female  idolators)  till  they 
believe  (worship  Allah  Alone).} 

“Allah  has  excluded  the  women  of  the  People  of  the 
Scripture. ”m  This  is  also  the  explanation  of  Mujahid,  Ikrimah, 
Said  bin  Jubayr,  Makhul,  Al-Hasan,  Ad-Dahhak,  Zayd  bin 
Aslam  and  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  and  others.121  Some  scholars  said 
that  the  Ayah  is  exclusively  talking  about  idol  worshippers  and 
not  the  People  of  the  Scripture,  and  this  meaning  is  similar  to 
the  first  meaning  we  mentioned.  Allah  knows  best. 

Abu  Jafar  bin  Jarir  (At-Tabari)  said,  after  mentioning  that 
there  is  Ijma‘  that  marrying  women  from  the  People  of  the 
Scripture  is  allowed,  "Umar  disliked  this  practice  so  that  the 
Muslims  do  not  refrain  from  marrying  Muslim  women,  or  for 
similar  reasons.”  131  An  authentic  chain  of  narrators  stated 
that  Shaqiq  said:  Once  Hudhayfah  married  a  Jewish  woman 
and  Umar  wrote  to  him,  “Divorce  her.”  He  wrote  back,  “Do 
you  claim  that  she  is  not  allowed  for  me  so  that  I  divorce 
her?”  He  said,  “No.  But,  I  fear  that  you  might  marry  the 
whores  from  among  them.”  Ibn  Jarir  related  that  Zayd  bin 
Wahb  said  that  ‘Umar  bin  Khattab  said,  “The  Muslim  man 
marries  the  Christian  woman,  but  the  Christian  man  does  not 
marry  the  Muslim  woman.”  This  Hadith  has  a  stronger, 
authentic  chain  of  narrators  than  the  previous  Hadith.^ 

1 1 1  At-Tabari  4 :362 . 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :669-67 1 . 

131  AMabari  4:366. 

141  See  At-Tabari  4 :366 


613 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  ( Part-2 ) 


Ibn  Abu  HatimI1J  said  that  Ibn  ‘Umar  disliked  marrying  the 
women  from  the  People  of  the  Scripture.  He  relied  on  his  own 
explanation  for  the  Ayah: 


iAnd  do  not  marry  Al-Mushrikdt  (female  idolators)  till  they 
believe  (worship  Allah  Alone).} 

Al-Bukhari  also  reported  that  Ibn  “Umar  said,  “I  do  not  know 
of  a  bigger  Shirk  than  her  saying  that  Jesus  is  her  Lord!”12' 
Allah  said: 


iAnd  indeed  a  slave  woman  who  believes  is  better  than  a  (free) 
Mushrikah  (female  idolators),  even  though  site  pleases  you 

It  is  recorded  in  the  Two  Sahlhs  that  Abu  Hurayrah  narrated 
that  the  Prophet  jg  said: 


oli;  4JU4JJ  LgJUJ  i\p\ 


woman  is  chosen  for  marriage  for  four  reasons :  her  wealth, 
social  status,  beauty,  and  religion.  So,  marry  the  religious 
woman,  may  your  hands  be  filled  with  sand  (a  statement  of 
encouragement JL*® 

Muslim  reported  this  Hadith  from  Jabir.^4*  Muslim  also 
reported  that  Ibn  ‘Amr  said  that  Allah’s  Messenger  said: 


«77ie  life  of  this  world  is  but  a  delight,  and  the  best  of  the 
delights  of  this  earthly  life  is  the  righteous  wife  V5* 

Allah  then  said: 


SsCii it 


iAnd  give  not  (your  daughters)  in  marriage  to  Al-Mushrikin 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :671 . 

121  FathAl-Bdri  9:326. 

Fath  Al-Bari  9 :35 ,  Muslim  2 : 1087 . 
141  Muslim  2:1087. 

,5)  Muslim  2:9010. 


624 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


till  they  believe  (in  Allah  Alone).} 

meaning,  do  not  marry  Mushrik  men  to  believing  women.  This 
statement  is  similar  to  Allah’s  statement: 


4They  are  not  lawful  (wives)  for  them,  nor  are  they  lawful 
(husbands)  for  them.}  (60:10) 

Next,  Allah  said: 


*  %  Is*  ^ 


4... and  verily,  a  believing  servant  is  better  than  a  (free) 
Mushrik  (idolator),  even  though  he  pleases  you.} 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  a  believing  man,  even  an 
Abyssinian  servant,  is  better  than  a  Mushrik  man,  even  if  he 
was  a  rich  master. 

i~0  jy  oy-i 


iThose  (Al-Mushrikiin)  invite  you  to  the  Fire} 

meaning,  associating  and  mingling  with  the  disbelievers  makes 
one  love  this  life  and  prefer  it  over  the  Hereafter,  leading  to  the 
severest  repercussions.  Allah  said: 

4.. . but  Allah  invites  (you)  to  Paradise  and  forgiveness  by  His 
leave} 

meaning,  by  His  Law,  commandments  and  prohibitions.  Allah 
said: 

4.. . and  makes  His  Aydt  clear  to  mankind  that  they  may 
remember.} 


44  h  it 

! &  JS4  $  fir  $  p  & 

4< 


4222 .  They  ask  you  concerning  menstruation .  Say :  " That  is  an 
Adha,  therefore,  keep  away  from  women  during  metises  and  go 


615 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  ( PgrtZ ) 

not  in  unto  them  till  they  are  purified."  And  when  they  have 
purified  themselves,  then  go  in  unto  them  as  Allah  has  ordained 
for  you.  Truly,  Allah  loves  those  who  turn  unto  Him  in 
repentance  and  loves  those  who  purify  themselves. } 

^223.  Your  wives  are  a  tilth  for  you,  so  go  to  your  tilth,  when 
or  how  you  will,  and  send  (good  deeds,  or  ask  Allah  to  bestoio 
upon  you  pious  offspring)  for  your  own  selves  beforehand.  And 
fear  Allah,  and  know  that  you  are  to  meet  Him  (in  the 
Hereafter),  and  give  good  tidings  to  the  believers  (O 
Muhammad 


Sexual  Intercourse  with  Menstruating  Women  is 
prohibited 


Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Anas  said  that  the  Jews  used  to 
avoid  their  menstruating  women,  they  would  not  eat,  or  even 
mingle  with  them  in  the  house.  The  Companions  of  the 
Prophet  asked  about  this  matter  and  Allah  revealed: 


4They  ask  you  concerning  menstruation.  Say:  " That  is  an 
Adhd,  therefore,  keep  away  from  women  during  menses  and  go 
not  in  unto  them  till  they  are  purified. )> 

Allah’s  Messenger  ^  said: 

ji  i^i» 

“Do  everything  you  loish,  except  having  sexual  intercourse .» 

When  the  Jews  were  told  about  the  Prophet’s  statement, 
they  said,  “What  is  the  matter  with  this  man?  He  would  not 
hear  of  any  of  our  practices,  but  would  defy  it.”  Then,  Usayd 
bin  Hudayr  and  ‘Abbad  bin  Bishr  came  and  said,  “O 
Messenger  of  Allah!  The  Jews  said  this  and  that,  should  we 
have  sex  with  our  women  (meaning,  during  the  menstruation 
period)?”  The  face  of  Allah’s  Messenger  changed  color,  until 
the  Companions  thought  that  he  was  angry  with  them.  They 
left.  Soon  after,  some  milk  was  brought  to  Allah’s  Messenger 
as  a  gift,  and  he  sent  some  of  it  for  them  to  drink.  They  knew 
then  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jt;  was  not  angry  with  them.'1' 

ui 


Ahmad  3 :132. 


616 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Muslim  also  reported  this  Hadith.  Allah  said: 

4  ...therefore,  keep  moay  from  women  during  menses 
meaning,  avoid  the  sexual  organ.  The  Prophet  said: 

V)  ^  ijJiLl»iii 

«Do  anything  you  wish  except  having  sexual  intercourse.^ 

This  is  why  most  of  the  scholars  said  that  it  is  allowed  to 
fondle  the  wife,  except  for  having  sexual  intercourse  (when  she 
is  having  her  menses).  Abu  Dawud  reported  that  ‘Ikrimah 
related  to  one  of  the  Prophet’s  wives  that  she  said  that 
whenever  the  Prophet  wanted  to  fondle  (one  of  his  wives) 
during  her  menses,  he  would  cover  her  sexual  organ  with 
something.’21 

Abu  Jafar  bin  Jarir  related  that  Masruq  went  to  ‘A’ishah 
and  greeted  her,  and  ‘A’ishah  greeted  him  in  return.  Masruq 
said,  “I  wish  to  ask  you  about  a  matter,  but  I  am  shy.”  She 
replied,  “I  am  your  mother  and  you  are  my  son.”  He  said, 
“What  can  the  man  enjoy  of  his  wife  when  she  is  having  her 
menses?”  She  said,  “Everything  except  her  sexual  organ.”13’ 
This  is  also  the  opinion  of  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Mujahid,  Al-Hasan  and 
‘Ikrimah. 

One  is  allowed  to  sleep  next  to  his  wife  and  to  eat  with  her 
(when  she  is  having  her  menses).  ‘A’ishah  said,  “Allah’s 
Messenger  sfe  used  to  ask  me  to  wash  his  hair  while  I  was 
having  the  menses.  He  would  lay  on  my  lap  and  read  the 
Qur’an  while  I  was  having  the  period.”’4’  It  is  also  reported  in 
the  $ahlh  that  ‘A’ishah  said,  “While  having  the  menses,  I  used 
to  eat  from  a  piece  of  meat  and  give  it  to  the  Prophet  sg  who 
would  eat  from  the  same  place  I  ate  from.  I  used  to  have  sips  of 
a  drink  and  would  then  give  the  cup  to  the  Prophet  who 
would  place  his  mouth  where  I  placed  my  mouth.”’5’ 

It  is  also  reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  Maymunah  bint 

Muslim  1 :246. 

’2’  Abu  Dawud  1 :286. 

131  At-Tabari  4:378. 

■4|  Fath  Al-Bari  1 :479 . 

’5’  Muslim  1 :245. 


617 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


Al-Harith  Al-Hilaliyah  said,  “Whenever  the  Prophet  jg  wanted 
to  fondle  any  of  his  wives  during  the  periods  (menses),  he  used 
to  ask  her  to  wear  an  Izar  (a  sheet  covering  the  lower-half  of  the 
body).”  These  are  the  wordings  collected  by  Al-Bukhari.1'1 
Similar  was  reported  from  ‘A’ishah.*2*  In  addition,  Imam 
Ahmad,  Abu  Dawud,  At-Tirmidhi  and  Ibn  Majah  reported  that 
‘Abdullah  bin  Sa‘d  Al-Ansari  asked  Allah’s  Messenger  jg,  “What 
am  I  allowed  of  my  wife  while  she  is  having  her  menses?”  He 
said,  “What  is  above  the  Izdr  (a  sheet  covering  the  lower-half  of 
the  body).”*3’  Hence,  Allah’s  statement: 


4... and  go  not  in  unto  them  till  they  are  purified.}  explains  His 
statement: 


4  oft-?**1'  4 


4...  therefore,  keep  away  from  xvomen  during  menses.} 

Allah  prohibited  having  sexual  intercourse  with  the  wife 
during  menstruation,  indicating  that  sexual  intercourse  is 
allowed  otherwise. 

Allah’s  statement: 


4^'  i?-  St 


4 And  when  they  have  purified  themselves,  then  go  in  unto 
them  as  Allah  has  ordained  for  you.} 

indicates  that  men  should  have  sexual  intercourse  with  their 
wives  after  they  take  a  bath.  The  scholars  agree  that  the 
woman  is  obliged  to  take  a  bath,  or  to  perform  Tayammum 
with  sand,  if  she  is  unable  to  use  water,  before  she  is  allowed 
to  have  sexual  intercourse  with  her  husband,  after  the 
monthly  period  ends.  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said: 

4SS&  &■} 


"4 till  they  are  purified}  means  from  blood,  and, 

111  Fath  Al-Bari  1 :483  .Muslim  1 :243. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  1 :480  .Muslim  1 :242. 

*3*  Ahmad  4:342,  Abu  Dawud  1 : 145,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  1:415,  Ibn 
Majah  1 :213. 


618 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kgtlnr 


4& £ 

4And  when  they  have  purified  themselves}  means  with  water.”  This 
is  also  the  Tafsir  of  Mujahid,  Ikrimah,  Al-Hasan,  Muqatil  bin 
tfayyan  and  Al-Layth  bin  Sa'd  and  others.1*1 


Anal  Sex  is  prohibited 

Allah  said: 

p  IZ.  £.> 

4... as  Allah  has  ordained  for  you.} 

this  refers  to  Al-Farj  (the  vagina),  as  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Mujahid  and 
other  scholars  have  stated.12'  Therefore,  anal  sex  is  prohibited, 
as  we  will  further  emphasize  afterwards,  Allah  willing.  Abu 
Razln,  ‘Ikrimah  and  Ad-Dahhak  and  others  said  that: 

4%  P  i?  it 

4... then  go  in  unto  them  as  Allah  has  ordained  for  you.} 

means  when  they  are  pure,  and  not  during  the  menses.'3' 
Allah  said  afterwards: 

4k&6  U  if 

iTruly,  Allah  loves  those  who  turn  unto  Him  in  repentance} 
from  the  sin  even  if  it  was  repeated, 

iand  loves  those  who  purify  themselves.} 

meaning,  those  who  purify  themselves  from  the  impurity  and 
the  filth  that  include  having  sexual  intercourse  with  the  wife 
during  the  menses  and  anal  sex. 


The  Reason  behind  revealing  Allah’s  Statement:  “Your 
Wives  are  a  Tilth  for  You.” 

Allah  said: 


ip 

'*'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :682,683 . 

'2'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :684 . 

*3'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2  :684 ,685 . 


619 


Surah  2.  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


iYour  wives  are  a  tilth  for  you,'} 

Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented,  “Meaning  the  place  of  pregnancy.”111 
(Allah  then  said:] 


$  pr  'M 


4... so  go  to  your  tilth,  when  or  how  you  will,} 

meaning,  wherever  you  wish  from  the  front  or  from  behind,  as 
long  as  sex  takes  place  in  one  valve  (the  female  sexual  organ), 
as  the  authentic  Hadiths  have  indicated. 

For  instance,  Al-Bukhari  recorded  that  Ibn  Al-Munkadir  said 
that  he  heard  Jabir  say  that  the  Jews  used  to  claim  that  if 
one  has  sex  with  his  wife  from  behind  (in  the  vagina)  the 
offspring  would  become  cross-eyed.  Then,  this  Ayah  was 
revealed: 


8  P?  $  P 


»  ./ 


iYour  wives  are  a  tilth  for  you,  $0  go  to  your  tilth,  when  or 
how  you  will,}121 

Muslim  and  Abu  Dawud  also  reported  this  HadlthP * 

Ibn  Abu  Hatim  said  that  Muhammad  bin  Al-Munkadir 
narrated  that  Jabir  bin  ‘Abdullah  told  him  that  the  Jews 
claimed  to  the  Muslims  that  if  one  has  sex  with  their  wife  from 
behind  (in  the  vagina)  their  offspring  will  become  cross-eyed. 
Allah  revealed  afterwards: 


$  p?  $  p  & 


iYour  wives  are  a  tilth  for  you,  so  go  to  your  tilth,  when  or 
how  you  will,} 

Ibn  Jurayj  (one  of  the  reporters  of  the  Hadith )  said  that 
Allah’s  Messenger  jfe  said: 

»£yi)l  villi  jl£  lil 

uFroin  the  front  or  from  behind,  as  long  as  that  occurs  in  the 
Farj  (vagina)  .»|4' 


111  At-Jabari  4:397. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  4 :397 . 

'3*  Muslim  2 :1058,  Abu  Dawud  2 :618. 
Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :693 . 


620 


Tafsir  Ibti  Kathir 
Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “The  Ayah, 

ip  ly  $£& 


iYour  wives  are  a  tilth  for  you} 

was  revealed  about  some  people  from  the  Ansar  who  came  to 
the  Prophet  sis  and  asked  him  (about  having  sex  with  the  wife 
from  behind).  He  said  to  them: 

j  'H  ^ 

“Have  sex  with  her  as  you  like  as  long  as  that  occurs  in  the 
vagina,  n1*1 

Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  ‘Abdullah  bin  Sabit  said:  I  went 
to  Hafsah  bint  ‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Abu  Bakr  and  said,  “I  wish 
to  ask  you  about  something,  but  I  am  shy.”  She  said,  “Do  not 
be  shy,  O  my  nephew.”  He  said,  “About  having  sex  from 
behind  with  women.”  She  said,  “Umm  Salamah  told  me  that 
the  Ansar  used  to  refrain  from  having  sex  from  behind  (in  the 
vagina).  The  Jews  claimed  that  those  who  have  sex  with  their 
women  from  behind  would  have  offspring  with  crossed-eyes. 
When  the  Muhajirun  came  to  Al-Madlnah,  they  married  Ansar 
women  and  had  sex  with  them  from  behind.  One  of  these 
women  would  not  obey  her  husband  and  said,  'You  will  not  do 
that  until  I  go  to  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  (and  ask  him  about  this 
matter).’  She  went  to  Umm  Salamah  and  told  her  the  story. 
Umm  Salamah  said,  ‘Wait  until  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  comes.’ 
When  Allah’s  Messenger  jfe  came,  the  Ansari  woman  was  shy  to 
ask  him  about  this  matter,  so  she  left.  Umm  Salamah  told 
Allah’s  Messenger  the  story  and  he  said: 


« Summon  the  Ansari  woman  J” 

She  was  summoned  and  he  recited  this  Ayah  to  her: 

$ 4  3  p?  $  p  ly 


iYour  wives  are  a  tilth  for  you,  so  go  to  your  tilth,  when  or 
how  you  will.}  He  added: 


m 


Ahmad  1 :268. 


621 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 


tOrtly  in  one  valve  (the  vagina) 


This  Hadith  was  also  collected  by  At-Tirmidhi  who  said, 
“  Hasan. ”121 

An-Nasal  reported  that  Ka*b  bin  ‘Alqamah  said  that  Abu  An- 
Nadr  said  that  he  asked  NafT,  “The  people  are  repeating  the 
statement  that  you  relate  from  Ibn  “Umar  that  he  allowed  sex 
with  women  in  their  rear  (anus).”  He  said,  “They  have  said  a 
lie  about  me.  But  let  me  tell  you  what  really  happened.  Ibn 
Umar  was  once  reciting  the  Qur’an  while  I  was  with  him  and 
he  reached  the  Ayah: 


tips 


$  p  & 


iYour  wives  are  a  tilth  for  you,  so  go  to  your  tilth,  when  or 
Imo  you  will,} 

He  then  said,  ‘O  Nafi‘!  Do  you  know  the  story  behind  this 
Ayah?’  I  said,  *No.’  He  said,  “We,  the  people  of  Quraysh,  used 
to  have  sexual  intercourse  with  our  wives  from  the  back  (in 
the  vagina).  When  we  migrated  to  Al-Madlnah  and  married 
some  Ansari  women,  we  wanted  to  do  the  same  with  them. 
They  disliked  it  and  made  a  big  issue  out  of  it.  The  Ansari 
women  had  followed  the  practice  of  the  Jews  who  have  sex 
with  their  women  while  they  lay  on  their  sides.  Then,  Allah 
revealed: 


4'p?  $  ps~  p 


iYour  wives  are  a  tilth  far  you,  so  go  to  your  tilth,  when  or 
hcnv  you  will,}'*3* 

This  has  an  authentic  chain  of  narrators. 

Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  Khuzaymah  bin  Thabit  Al- 
Khatami  narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jfe  said: 

J  ildJl  \p  N  -  lH:  -  Jiil  v» 


i Allah  does  not  shy  from  the  truth  -  he  said  it  thrice-,  do  not 
have  anal  sex  zvith  women. b,4) 


1,1  Ahmad  6:305. 

121  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8 :322 . 

An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  5:315. 
141  Ahmad  5:215. 


622 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 

This  Hadith  was  collected  by  An-Nasal  and  Ibn  Majah.'1' 

Abu  ‘Isa  At-Tirmidhi  and  An-Nasal  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  sg  said: 

•sM  J  l\y\  j\  yJrj  jJrj  J!  ls>\  ‘k:  v* 

« Allah  does  not  look  at  a  man  who  had  anal  sex  with  another 

man  or  a  woman .  »'2' 

At-Tirmidhi  said,  “ Hasan  Gharib.”  This  is  also  the  narration 
that  Ibn  Hibban  collected  in  his  Sahih,  while  Ibn  Hazm  stated 
that  this  is  an  authentic  Hadith. 

In  addition,  Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  ‘Ali  bin  Talaq  said, 
“Allah’s  Messenger  forbade  anal  sex  with  women,  for  Allah 
does  not  shy  away  from  truth.  ”,3)  Abu  Isa  At-Tirmidhi  also 
reported  this  Hadith  and  said,  “Hasan”.'41 

Abu  Muhammad  ‘Abdullah  bin  ‘Abdur-Rahman  Darimi 
reported  in  his  Musnad  that  Said  bin  Yasar  Abu  Hubab  said:  I 
said  to  Ibn  Umar,  “What  do  you  say  about  having  sex  with 
women  in  the  rear?”  He  said,  “What  does  it  mean?”  I  said, 
“Anal  sex.”  He  said,  “Does  a  Muslim  do  that?”'5'  This  Hadith 
has  an  authentic  chain  of  narrators  and  is  an  explicit  rejection 
of  anal  sex  from  Ibn  Umar. 

Abu  Bakr  bin  Ziyad  Naysaburi  reported  that  Ismail  bin  Ruh 
said  that  he  asked  Malik  bin  Anas,  “What  do  you  say  about 
having  sex  with  women  in  the  anus?”  He  said,  “You  are  not  an 
Arab?  Does  sex  occur  but  in  the  place  of  pregnancy?  Do  it 
only  in  the  Fatj  (vagina).”  I  said,  “O  Abu  ‘Abdullah!  They  say 
that  you  allow  that  practice.”  He  said,  “They  utter  a  lie  about 
me,  they  lie  about  me.”  This  is  Malik’s  firm  stance  on  this 
subject.  It  is  also  the  view  of  Said  bin  Musayyib,  Abu 
Salamah,  ‘Ikrimah,  Tawus,  ‘Ata  ,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Urwah  bin 
Az-Zubayr,  Mujahid  bin  Jabr,  Al-Hasan  and  other  scholars  of 
the  Salaf  (the  Companions  and  the  following  two  generations 

'*'  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  5:316,  Ibn  Majah  1 :619. 

(2'  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  4  :329 ,  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  5:320,  Sahih  Ibn 

Hibban  6:202. 

‘3|  Ibn  Hajr  mentioned  it  in  Atraf  Al-Musnad  4 :384 ,  but  it  is  not  in  the 

published  version . 

Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  4 :274 . 

^  Ad-Darimi  1  :277  no.  1143. 


623 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (201  -  224)  (Part-2) 

after  them).  They  all,  along  with  the  majority  of  the  scholars, 
harshly  rebuked  the  practice  of  anal  sex  and  many  of  them 
called  this  practice  a  Ku.fr. 

Allah  said: 


4 . .  .and  send  for  your  own  selves  beforehand .} 

meaning,  by  performing  the  acts  of  worship  while  refraining 
from  whatever  Allah  has  prohibited  for  you.  This  is  why  Allah 
said  afterwards: 


4And  fear  Allah,  and  know  that  you  are  to  meet  Him  (in  the 
Hereof  ter), $ 

meaning,  He  will  hold  you  accountable  for  all  of  your  deeds, 


4... and  give  good  tidings  to  the  believers  (O  Muhammad 

meaning,  those  who  obey  what  Allah  has  commanded  and 
refrain  from  what  He  has  prohibited.  Ibn  Jarir  reported  that 
‘Ata’  said,  or  related  it  to  Ibn  ‘Abbas, 


4... and  send  for  your  own  selves  beforehand.} 


means,  mention  Allah’s  Name,  by  saying,  ‘BismiUah’,  before 
having  sexual  intercourse. ’’,11  Al-Bukhari  also  reported  that 
Ibn  ‘Abbas  narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  js  said: 


.j  Jlligjjl  gill  c 4*^  p-jL  :  Jli  aLa)  jjj U  ji  li]  tjl 

jlhlill  jU  .illi  jlJ j  jjJi!  j|  klHsj j  U  jlhji.ll 


« If  anyone  of  you  on  having  sexual  relations  with  his  wife  said: 
'In  the  Name  of  Allah.  O  Allah!  Protect  us  from  Satan  and  also 
protect  what  you  bestow  upon  us  (i.e.,  the  coming  offspring) 
from  Satan,’  and  if  it  is  destined  tluit  they  should  have  a  child 
then,  Satan  will  never  be  able  to  harm 


m  At-Jabari  4:417. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  9 : 136 . 


624 


Tafsir  [bn  Katlur 


J 


r  '  il&i JI&4 

d^rcc  ^4'Sc^i 

O^J^T. &&&&&&,  $$} 

btA-ob 

ffrvj 

JrScAj  ^Ul'j^b^i^  4 

J  j&*3 

j&*  jjfji 

jJu  » *J  Juf  *ife  l^jdl»oU^^  Ojrtilla) '  (»* 
|j£|  ofajc  fafa l^iliu  4J)' J_jji-  ii^j_gjIl\j>ji-Ul.O| 


at  ■*;>> 

ijiljj  'j£  v_^ 

tr  %  U®  £*. 

>tfl  Sf  ;&#  V:  :m;*L^ 

Q  r&e'$>  jfe*^  U 

^-f<  >if/  •■"'V' 

jjap  *ajj  {Vy^li  Oa-3 

4224.  An<f  make  not 
Allah's  (Name)  an  ex¬ 
cuse  in  your  oaths 
agaitist  doing  good  and 
acting  piously,  and 
making  peace  among 
mankind.  And  Allah  is 
All-Hearer,  All-Knower 
(i.e.,  do  not  swear 
much  and  if  you  have 
sworn  against  doing 
something  good  then 
give  an  expiation  for  the 
oath  and  do  good).} 
4225.  Allah  will  not  call  you  to  account  for  that  which  is 
unintentional  in  your  oaths,  but  He  will  call  you  to  account  far  that 
which  your  hearts  have  earned.  And  Allah  is  Oft-Forgiving,  Most- 
Forbearing.} 

The  Prohibition  of  swearing  to  abandon  a  Good  Deed 

Allah  commands,  “You  should  not  implement  your  vows  in 
Allah’s  Name  to  refrain  from  pious  acts  and  severing  the 
relations  with  the  relatives,  if  you  swear  to  abandon  such 
causes.’  Allah  said  in  another  Ayah: 

far-  *4  i4r^frJi>  4^*  jJ  'AH  fa-t  fajidi  i>!ji  Y ')} 

ill'  jiuo  ji  Vi  l^uu <d)  t fafaj 

4 And  let  not  those  among  you  who  are  blessed  with  graces  and 


Siiralt  2.  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


625 


wealth  swear  not  to  give  (any  sort  of  help)  to  their  kinsmen,  Al- 
Masdkin  (the  poor),  and  those  who  left  their  homes  for  Allah's 
cause.  Let  them  pardon  and  forgive.  Do  you  not  love  that  Allah 
should  forgive  you?$  (24:22) 


Continuity  in  a  sinful  vow  is  more  sinful  than  breaking  it  by 
expiation.  Allah’s  Messenger  sfe  said: 


O*  Ifi  4)'  X*  ^  oV  4)ty 

a<lU  4)1 


“By  Allah!  It  is  more  sinful  to  Allah  that  one  of  you 
implements  his  vow  regarding  (severing  the  relations  ivith)  his 
relatives  than  (breaking  his  promise  and)  paying  the  Kajfarah 111 
that  Allah  has  required  in  such  cases." 

This  is  how  Muslim  reported  this  Hadith  and  also  Imam 
Ahmad.121 

‘Ali  bin  Abu  Talhah  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  what 
Allah  said: 

4 it  'jbui 


iAtid  make  not  Allah's  (Name)  an  excuse  in  your  oaths } 


means,  “Do  not  vow  to  refrain  from  doing  good  works.  (If  you 
make  such  vow  then)  break  it,  pay  the  Kaffdrah  and  do  the 
good  work.”131  This  was  also  said  by  MasrQq,  Ash-ShaTa, 
Ibrahim  An-Nakhal,  Mujahid,  Tawus,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  ‘Ata’, 
Ikiimah,  Makhul,  Az-Zuhri,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Muqatil  bin 
Hayyan,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas,  Ad-Dahhak,  ‘Ata’  Al-Khurasani  and 
As-Suddi.14* 

Suporting  this  view,  which  is  the  majority  view,  is  what  is 
reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs  that  Abu  Musa  Al-Ash‘ari 
narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  sg  said: 


^jJl  \'jf.  U 'Ji.  i  <4)1  ij  4)1  j  Jj» 


“By  Allah!  Allah  willing,  I  will  not  vow  to  do  a  thing  and  then 
111  Expiation,  refer  to  5:89. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  12:441,  Muslim  3  :1276,  Ahmad  2  :317. 

131  At-Tabari  4 :422 . 

141  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :700-702 . 


626 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathrr 

see  a  better  act ,  but  I  would  do  what  is  better  and  break  my 
vow.^  Muslim  reported  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that 
Allah’s  Messenger  5gc  said: 


« Whoever  makes  a  vow  and  then  finds  what  is  better  than  his 
vow  (should  break  his  vow,)  pay  the  Kaffarah  and  perform  the 
better  deed.^ 


The  Laghw  (Unintentional)  Vows 

Allah  said: 

o  f&i  ill 


iAlldh  will  not  call  you  to  account  for  that  which  is 
unintentional  in  your  oaths, y 


This  Ayah  means,  ‘Allah  does  not  punish  or  hold  you 
accountable  for  the  Laghw  (unintentional)  vows  that  you 
make.’  The  Laghw  vows  are  unintentional  and  are  just  like  the 
habitual  statements  that  the  tongue  repeats,  without  really 
intending  them.  For  instance,  it  is  reported  in  the  Two  Sahihs 
that  Abu  Hurayrah  narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  sg  said: 


'4>l  V)  1)1  V  jilli  iijyMj  aaL>-  Jlii  • _ iLi- 


^Whoever  swore  and  (unintentionally)  mentioned  Al-Ldt  and 
Al-'Uzza  (two  idols)  in  his  vow,  should  then  say,  'There  is  no 
deity  worthy  of  worship  except  Allah' .»’31 


The  Messenger  said  this  statement  to  some  new  Muslims 
whose  tongues  were,  before  Islam,  used  to  vowing  by  their  idol 
Al-Lat.  Therefore,  the  Prophet  ordered  them  to  intentionally 
recite  the  slogan  of  Ikhlas,  just  as  they  mentioned  these  words 
by  mistake,  so  that  it  (the  word  of  Ikhlas)  may  eradicate  the 
word  (of  Shirk).  This  is  why  Allah  said: 


111  Fath  Al-Bari  11 :525,  Muslim  3:1268 
121  Muslim  3:1272. 

Pl  Fath  Al-Bari  1 1 :545 ,  Muslim  2 : 1268 . 


627 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 

i... but  He  will  call  you  to  account  for  that  which  your  hearts 
have  earned.}  and  in  another  Ayah: 

i  lAV'i  ’{jIl.  \^} 

i...for  your  deliberate  oaths}  (5:89) 

Abu  Dawud  reported  under  Chapter:  The  Laghw  Vows’  that 
‘Ata’  said  that  ‘A’ishah  said  that  Allah’s  Messenger  sg  said: 

“*>>;•  jj  ^1)  &  :«£  J  J  iUll. 

«77u?  Laghw  in  the  voios  includes  what  the  man  says  in  his 
house,  such  as,  'No,  by  Allah,’  and,  'Yes,  by  Allah'.*™ 

Ibn  Abu  Hatim  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “The  Laghw 
vow  includes  vowing  while  angry.”121 

He  also  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “The  Laghw  vow 
includes  vowing  to  prohibit  what  Allah  has  allowed,  and  this 
type  does  not  require  a  Kaffdrah  (expiation).”  Similar  was  said 
by  Said  bin  JubayrJ31 

In  addition,  Abu  Dawtid  related  under  Chapter:  Vowing 
while  Angry’  that  Said  bin  Musayyib  said  that  two  Ansari 
brothers  both  received  inheritance  and  one  of  them  asked  that 
the  inheritance  be  divided.  His  brother  said,  “If  you  ask  me 
about  dividing  the  inheritance  again,  then  all  of  what  I  have 
will  be  spent  on  the  Ka'bah’s  door.”  ‘Umar  said  to  him,  “The 
Ka'bah  does  not  need  your  money.  So  break  your  vow,  pay  the 
Kaffdrah  and  come  to  terms  with  your  brother.  I  heard  Allah’s 
Messenger  jg  saying: 

'i  3*  4^*  ir***  j  'ij  'i> 


“Do  not  make  a  vow  against  yourself,  nor  to  disobey  the  Lord,  cut 
the  relations  of  the  womb  or  dispose  of  what  you  do  not  own .  o”1’41 

Allah  said: 


m  Abu  Dawud  3:572. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2:716. 
131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2:715. 
|4)  Abu  DAwud  3:581. 


$28 _ Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

i,..hut  He  will  call  you  to  account  for  that  which  your  hearts 
nave  earned 

lbn  Abbas,  Mujahid  and  several  others  said  that  this  Ayah 
means  swearing  about  a  matter  while  knowing  that  he  is  lying, 
Mujahid  and  others  said  this  Ayah  is  similar  to  what  Allah  said: 

i tiff  He  will  punish  you  for  your  deliberate  oaths  ^  (5:89) 
Allah  said  (2:225  above): 


iAinl  Allah  is  Oft-Forgiving,  Most-Forbearing 


meaning,  He  is  Oft-Forgiving  to  His  servants  and  Most 
Forbearing  with  them. 


i’.'b  m  .^>-3  jy*'  ^  y  jjJyi 


4  ttv  JLk 

i2  2(k  Those  who  take  an  oath  not  to  have  sexual  relation  with 
their  wives  must  wait  for  four  months ,  then  if  they  return , 
venly,  Allah  is  Oft-Forgiving,  Most  Merciful. ± 

4223'.  And  if  they  decide  upon  divorce ,  then  Allah  is  All- 
Hvater,  AU-Knower,} 


The  n  %*  and  its  Rulings 

lid *  is  a  type  of  vow  where  a  man  swears  not  to  sleep  with 
his  w if;'  for  a  certain  period,  whether  less  or  more  than  four 
months.  If  the  vow  of  lid *  was  for  less  than  four  months,  the 
man  has  to  wait  for  the  vow’s  period  to  end  and  then  is 
allowt  a  to  have  sexual  intercourse  with  his  wife.  She  has  to  be 
patient  and  she  cannot  ask  her  husband,  in  this  case,  to  end 
his  vc  w  before  the  end  of  its  term.  It  is  reported  in  the  Two 
Sahth.s  that  ‘A 'is hah  said  that  Allah’s  Messenger  ^  swore  lie 
would  stay  away  from  with  his  wives  for  a  month.  He  then 
came  down  after  twenty-nine  days  saying: 

.1  f  \  *  *  a  -  ■***!(» 

IlJJj — 

iThe  (lunar)  month  is  twen ty -nine  days 

111  Fath  Al-Bari  8  :380 ,  Muslim  2:1113. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


629 


Similar  was  narrated  by  TJmar  bin  Al-Khattab  and  reported 
in  the  Two  Sahtfys)^  If  the  period  of  Ila*  is  for  more  than  four 
months,  the  wife  is  allowed  in  this  case  to  ask  her  husband, 
upon  the  end  of  the  four  months,  to  end  the  Ila ’  and  have 
sexual  relations  with  her.  Otherwise,  he  should  divorce  her,  by 
being  forced  to  do  so  by  the  authorities  if  necessaiy,  so  that 
the  wife  is  not  harmed.  Allah  said: 

iThose  who  take  an  oath  not  to  have  sexual  relations  with  their 
wives } 

meaning,  swear  not  to  have  sexual  relations  with  the  wife. 
This  Ayah  indicates  that  the  Ila '  involves  the  wife  and  not  a 
slave-women,  as  the  majority  of  the  scholars  have  agreed, 

4 . .  .must  wait  for  four  months,} 

meaning,  the  husband  waits  for  four  months  from  the  time  of 
the  vow  and  then  ends  the  lid.’  (if  the  vow  was  for  four  or  more 
months)  and  is  required  to  either  return  to  his  wife  or  divorce 
her.  This  is  why  Allah  said  next: 

4- -then  if  they  return,} 

meaning,  to  a  normal  relationship,  having  sexual  intercourse 
with  the  wife.  This  is  the  Tafsir  of  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Masruq,  Ash- 
Sha*bi,  SaTd  bin  Jubayr  and  Ibn  Jarir.  ^ 

4... verily,  Allah  is  Oft-Forgiving,  Most  Merciful.} 

with  any  shortcomings  that  occurred  in  the  rights  of  the  wife 
because  of  the  vow  of  lid’. 

Allah  said: 


im  10 

4 And  if  they  decide  upon  divorce,} 


111  FathAl-Bari  4:143,  Muslim  2:1110. 
121  At-Tabari  4 :466 ,467 . 


630 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlur 


indicating  that  divorce  does  not  occur  by  merely  passing  the 
four  month  mark  (during  the  Ila).  Malik  reported  from  Nafi‘ 
that  ‘Abdullah  bin  Umar  said,  “If  the  man  swears  to  ila'  from 
his  wife,  then  divorce  does  not  occur  automatically  even  after 
the  four  months  have  passed.  When  he  stops  at  the  four 
months  mark,  he  should  either  divorce  or  return.”111  Al- 
Bukhari  also  reported  this  Hadlth .*2*  Ibn  Jarir  reported  that 
Suhayl  bin  Abu  Salih  said  that  his  father  said,  “I  asked  twelve 
Companions  about  the  man  who  does  Ila’  with  his  wife.  They 
all  stated  that  he  does  not  have  to  do  anything  until  the  four 
months  have  passed  and  then  has  to  either  retain  or  divorce 
her.”*3*  Ad-Daraqutni  also  reported  this  from  Suhayl.*4* 

It  is  also  reported  from  Umar,  Uthman,  ‘Ali,  Abu  Ad-Darda’, 
‘A’ishah,  Ibn  Umar  and  Ibn  ‘Abbas.  This  is  also  the  opinion  of 
Said  bin  Musayyib,  Umar  bin  ‘Abdul-'AzIz,  Mujahid,  Tawus, 
Muhammad  bin  Ka*b  and  Al-Qasim. 


13  <i'  U  jl  $  Vj  jjJ »  ^ 


4228.  And  divorced  women  shall  xoait  (as  regards  their 
marriage)  for  three  menstrual  periods,  and  it  is  not  lawful  for 
them  to  conceal  wlmt  Allah  Ims  created  in  their  wombs,  if  they 
believe  in  Allah  and  the  Last  Day.  And  their  husbands  have  the 
better  right  to  take  them  back  in  that  period,  if  they  wish  for 
reconciliation.  And  they  (women)  have  rights  (over  their 
husbands  as  regards  living  expenses)  similar  (to  those  of  their 
husbands)  over  them  (as  regards  obedience  and  respect)  to  what 
is  reasonable,  but  men  have  a  degree  (of  responsibility)  over 
them.  And  Allah  is  All-Mighty,  All-Wise 


The  * Iddah  (Waiting  Period)  of  the  Divorced  Woman 

This  Ayah  contains  a  command  from  Allah  that  the  divorced 
woman,  whose  marriage  was  consummated  and  who  still  has 

* 1  *  Al-Muwatta  2  :556 . 

*2*  FathAl-Bari  9:335. 

*3*  At-Tabari  4:493. 

*4*  Ad-Daraqutni  4:61. 


632 


Surnh  2-  Al-Baaarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 

menstruation  periods,  should  wait  for  three  (menstrual) 
periods  (Quru)  after  the  divorce  and  then  remarry  if  she 
wishes. 

The  Meaning  of  Al-Quru’ 

Ibn  Jarir  related  that  ‘Alqamah  said:  We  were  with  ‘Umar  bin 
Al-Khattab  when  a  woman  came  and  said,  “My  husband 
divorced  me  one  or  two  periods  ago.  He  then  came  back  to  me 
while  I  had  prepared  my  water  (for  taking  a  bath],  took  off  my 
clothes  and  closed  my  door.”  ‘Umar  asked  ‘Abdullah  bin 
Mas'ud,  “What  do  you  think?”  He  said,  “I  think  that  she  is  still 
his  wife,  as  long  as  she  is  not  allowed  to  resume  praying  (i.e., 
until  the  third  period  ends  before  he  takes  her  back).”  ‘Umar 
said,  “This  is  my  opinion  too.”1'1  This  is  also  the  opinion  of 
Abu  Bakr  As-Siddiq,  ‘Umar,  ‘Uthman,  ‘Ali,  Abu  Ad-Darda’, 
‘Ubadah  bin  As-Samit,  Anas  bin  Malik,  Ibn  MasUd,  Mu'adh, 
Ubayy  bin  Ka‘b,  Abu  Musa  Al-Ash‘ari  and  Ibn  ‘Abbas. 
Furthermore,  this  is  the  opinion  of  Sa*Id  bin  Musayyib, 
‘Alqamah,  Aswad,  Ibrahim,  Mujahid,  ‘Ata’,  Tawus,  Said  bin 
Jubayr,  ‘Ikrimah,  Muhammad  bin  Sirin,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah, 
Ash-Shatii,  Ar-RabT,  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan,  As-Suddi,  Makhul, 
Ad-Dahhak  and  ‘Ata’  Al-Khurasani.  They  all  stated  that  the 
Quru’  is  the  menstruation  period.  What  testifies  to  this  is  the 
Hadith  that  Abu  Dawud  and  An-Nasal  reported  that  Fatimah 
bint  Abu  Hubaiysh  said  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said  to  her: 

"Do  not  pray  during  your  Aqrd'  (pi.  for  Quru’,  the 

menstruation  period) .  »,2‘ 

If  this  Hadith  was  authentic,  it  would  have  been  a  clear 
proof  that  the  Quru’  is  the  menstruation  period.  However,  one 
of  the  narrators  of  this  Hadith,  Al-Mundhir,  is  an  unknown 
person  (in  Hadith  terminology),  as  Abu  Hatim  has  stated, 
although  Ibn  Hibban  has  mentioned  Al-Mundhir  in  his  book 
Ath-Thiqat. 


111  At-Tabari  4:502. 

121  Abu  Dawud  1 :191 ,  An-Nasal  6 :21 1 . 


632 _ Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

A  Woman's  Statement  about  Menses  and  Purity  is  to  be 
accepted 

Allah  said: 

4lrt('f$  t)  ii*  U  o'  if  Ni>4 

4... and  it  is  not  lawful  for  them  to  conceal  what  Allah  has 
created  in  their  wombs,} 

meaning,  of  pregnancy  or  menstruation  periods.  This  is  the 
Tafsir  of  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Ibn  ‘Umar,  Mujahid,  Ash-Shabi,  Al- 
Hakam  bin  ‘Utaybah,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas,  Ad-Dahhak  and 
others.111 

Allah  then  said: 

4  jS'  fyf  'i  Ir.'A  ’S  <ji4 

4... if  they  believe  in  Allah  and  the  Last  Day.} 

This  Ayah  warns  women  against  hiding  the  truth  (if  they 
were  pregnant  or  on  their  menses),  indicating  that  they  are  the 
authority  in  such  matters  as  they  alone  know  such  facts 
about  themselves.  Since  verifying  such  matters  is  difficult, 
Allah  left  this  decision  with  them.  Yet,  women  were  warned 
not  to  hide  the  truth  in  case  they  wish  to  end  the  Tddah 
sooner,  or  later,  according  to  their  desires.  Women  were  thus 
commanded  to  say  the  truth  (if  they  were  pregnant  or  on  their 
menses),  no  more  and  no  less. 


The  Husband  has  the  Right  to  take  back  his  Divorced 
Wife  during  the  * Iddah  (Waiting  Period) 


Allah  said: 


4And  their  husbands  have  the  better  right  to  hike  them  back  in 
that  period,  if  they  wish  for  reconciliation.} 

Hence,  the  husband  who  divorces  his  wife  can  take  her 
back,  providing  she  is  still  in  her  Tddah  (time  spent  before  a 
divorced  woman  or  a  widow  can  remarry)  and  that  his  aim,  by 
taking  her  back,  is  righteous  and  for  the  purpose  of  bringing 
things  back  to  normal.  However,  this  ruling  applies  where  the 


1,1  Ibn  Abi  HStim  2:744,745. 


633 


Surat  2.  ATBacjarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 

husband  is  eligible  to  take  his  divorced  wife  back.  We  should 
mention  that  (when  this  Ayah  2:228  was  revealed),  the  ruling 
that  made  the  divorce  thrice  and  specified  when  the  husband 
is  ineligible  to  take  his  divorced  wife  back,  had  not  been 
revealed  yet.  Previously,  the  man  used  to  divorce  his  wife  and 
then  take  her  back  even  if  he  had  divorced  her  a  hundred 
separate  times.  Thereafter,  Allah  revealed  the  following  Ayah 
(2:229)  that  made  the  divorce  only  thrice.  So  there  was  now  a 
reversible  divorce  and  an  irreversible  final  divorce. 


The  Rights  the  Spouses  have  over  Bach  Other 

Allah  said: 


iWBi  !&*$&&> 


iAttd  they  (women)  have  rights  (over  their  husbands  as  regards 
living  expenses)  similar  (to  those  of  their  husbands)  over  them 
(as  regards  obedience  and  respect)  to  what  is  reasonable 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  the  wife  has  certain  rights  on  her 
husband,  just  as  he  has  certain  rights  on  her,  and  each  is 
obliged  to  give  the  other  spouse  his  due  rights.  Muslim 
reported  that  Jabir  said  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said: 


p  Til  J  l4)t  iitiL  y-Ct  -L~>- 1  L  .  I ...  '■ !  I  <0)1  \  yjj\ 

Jib  jia  ^  of  tAI 

■  '  *  *  '  *  c"  "  *  -  *  -  *  '*  I "  • 


i-Fear  Allah  regarding  your  women,  for  you  have  taken  them  by 
Allah's  covenant  and  were  alloioed  to  enjoy  with  them  sexually 
by  Allah's  Words.  You  have  the  right  on  them  that  they  do  not 
allow  anyone  you  dislike  to  sit  on  your  mat.  If  they  do  that, 
then  discipline  them  leniently.  They  have  the  right  to  be  spent 
on  and  to  be  bought  clothes  in  ivhat  is  reasonable. n*11 


Bahz  bin  Hakim  said  that  Mu'awiyah  bin  Haydah  Al- 
Qushayri  related  that  his  grandfather  said,  “O  Messenger  of 
Allah!  What  is  the  right  the  wife  of  one  of  us  has?”  The 
Prophet  sg  said: 


yjli  Nj  t  lij  Vb  J  i  lit  ^  A  *  ^ 


m 


Muslim  2  :886 . 


634 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


J  t  sw  Vj 


«To  feed  her  when  you  eat,  buy  her  clothes  when  you  buy  for 
yourself  and  to  refrain  from  striking  her  on  the  face,  cursing 
her  or  staying  away  from  her  except  in  the  house 

Wala‘  related  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “I  like  to  take  care  of  my 
appearance  for  my  wife  just  as  I  like  for  her  to  take  care  of  her 
appearance  for  me.  This  is  because  Allah  says: 


iAnd  they  (women)  Imve  rights  similar  (to  those  of  their 
husbands)  over  them  to  what  is  reasonable This  statement 
is  reported  by  Ibn  Jarir  and  Ibn  Abu  Hatim. ,2) 


The  Virtue  Men  have  over  Women 


Allah  said: 


ibut  men  have  a  degree  (of  responsibility)  over  them.$ 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  men  are  in  a  more  advantageous 
position  than  women  physically  as  well  as  in  their  mannerism, 
status,  obedience  (of  women  to  them),  spending,  taking  care  of 
the  affairs  and  in  general,  in  this  life  and  in  the  Hereafter. 
Allah  said  (in  another  Ayah): 


ot  j***.  .>  i uLj  jc. 


iMen  are  the  protectors  and  maintainers  of  women,  because 
Allah  has  made  one  of  them  to  excel  the  other,  and  because  they 
spend  (to  support  them)  from  their  means.}  (4:34) 

Allah’s  statement: 


iAnd  Allah  is  AU-Miglity,  All-Wise } 
means,  He  is  Mighty  in  His  punishment  of  those  who  disobey 

Abu  Dawud  2 :606. 

121  At-Jabari  4 :532,  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2  :750. 


635 


Surah  2.  Al-Bagaralt  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


and  defy  His  commands.  He  is  Wise  in  what  He  commands, 
destines  and  legislates. 


Vi  Vi  ^  ^  V*Jb  V'  Uli£  0*  ^  ill*- 

Ji^L  UjjoG  Vi  <if  jjii-  lilij  “*•  *j-ns'  G>  U^‘_^ 

0^  Uul'Jij  jl  U  ,:_lr.  ^li*.  Vi  l^iil*  o£  •j«’  Cjj  <£»■  jju  <J  Sh  ^  jU 

4  ..it*..  0>3io  ji'jA  Iplu  h'  ijjo.  4j>f  J_J ia-  UJ*J  O'  ill* 


4229.  The  divorce  is  twice,  after  that  either  you  retain  her  on 
reasonable  terms  or  release  her  with  kindness.  And  it  is  not 
lawful  for  you  (men)  to  take  back  (from  your  wives)  any  of  what 
you  gave  them  (the  Mohr,  bridal-money  given  by  the  husband 
to  his  wife  at  the  time  of  marriage),  except  when  both  parties 
fear  that  they  would  be  unable  to  keep  the  limits  ordained  by 
Allah  (e.g.,  to  deal  with  each  other  on  a  fair  basis).  Then  if  you 
fear  that  they  would  not  be  able  to  keep  the  limits  ordained  by 
Allah,  then  there  is  no  sin  on  either  of  them  if  she  gives  back 
(the  Mahr  or  a  part  of  it).  These  are  the  limits  ordained  by 
Allah,  so  do  not  transgress  them.  And  whoever  transgresses  the 
limits  ordained  by  Allah,  then  such  are  the  zvrongdoers 

4230.  And  if  he  has  divorced  her  (the  third  time),  then  she  is 
not  lawful  unto  him  thereafter  until  she  has  married  another 
husband.  Then,  if  the  other  husband  divorces  her,  it  is  no  sin 
on  both  of  them  that  they  reunite,  provided  they  feel  that  they 
can  keep  the  limits  ordained  by  Allah.  These  are  the  limits  of 
Allah,  which  He  makes  plain  for  the  people  who  have 
knowledge. 


Divorce  is  Thrice 

This  honorable  Ayah  abrogated  the  previous  practice  in  the 
beginning  of  Islam,  when  the  man  had  the  right  to  take  back 
his  divorced  wife  even  if  he  had  divorced  her  a  hundred  times, 
as  long  as  she  was  still  in  her  ‘Iddah  (wail.n;  period).  This 
situation  was  harmful  for  the  wife,  and  this  is  why  Allah  made 
the  divorce  thrice,  where  the  husband  is  allowed  to  take  back 
his  wife  after  the  first  and  the  second  divorce  (as  long  as  she 
is  still  in  her  ‘Iddah).  The  divorce  becomes  irrevocable  after  the 


636 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


third  divorce,  as  Allah  said: 


477/e  divorce  is  twice,  after  that,  either  you  retain  her  on 
reasonable  terms  or  release  her  with  kindness.} 


In  his  Siman,  Abu  Dawud  reported  in  Chapter:  “Taking  the 
Wife  back  after  the  third  (Divorce)  is  an  abrogated  practice," 
that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented  on  the  Ayah: 


iAnd  divorced  women  shall  zoait  (as  regards  their  marriage)  for 
three  menstrual  periods,  and  it  is  not  lawful  for  them  to  conceal 
what  Allah  has  created  in  their  wombs,}  (2:228) 

The  man  used  to  have  the  right  to  take  back  his  wife  even  if 
he  had  divorced  her  thrice.  Allah  abrogated  this  and  said: 


477/e  divorce  is  twice. }^ 

This  Hadith  was  also  collected  by  An-Nasal.121  Ibn  Abu 
Hatim  reported  that  TJrwah  said  that  a  man  said  to  his  wife,  “I 
will  neither  divorce  you  nor  take  you  back.”  She  said,  “How?” 
He  said,  “I  will  divorce  you  and  when  your  term  of  ‘Iddah 
nears  its  end,  I  will  take  you  back.”  She  went  to  Allah’s 
Messenger  sg  and  told  him  what  happened,  and  Allah  revealed: 


436? 


477/e  divorce  is  twice. }^ 

Ibn  Jarir  (At-Tabari)  also  reported  this  Hadith  in  his 
Tafsir.™ 

Allah  said: 


icr~k 


4... after  that,  either  you  retain  her  on  reasonable  terms  or 
release  her  with  kindness.} 


***  Abu  Dawud  2 :644. 

An-Nasal  6:212. 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2:754. 
141  At-Tabari  4:539. 


637 


Surah  2...Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 

meaning,  If  you  divorce  her  once  or  twice,  you  have  the  choice 
to  take  her  back,  as  long  as  she  is  still  in  her  ‘Iddah, 
intending  to  be  kind  to  her  and  to  mend  differences. 
Otherwise,  await  the  end  of  her  term  of  ‘Iddah,  when  the 
divorce  becomes  final,  and  let  her  go  her  own  way  in  peace, 
without  committing  any  harm  or  injustice  against  her.’  ‘Ali  bin 
Abu  Talhah  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “When  the  man 
divorces  his  wife  twice,  let  him  fear  Allah,  regarding  the  third 
time.  He  should  either  keep  her  with  him  and  treat  her  with 
kindness,  or  let  her  go  her  own  way  with  kindness,  without 
infringing  upon  any  of  her  rights. ’’I1* 


Taking  back  the  Mahr  (Dowry) 

Allah  said: 


i>j o'  'Jj)> 


iAnd  it  is  not  lawful  for  you  (men)  to  take  back  (from  your 
wives)  any  of  (the  dowry)  what  you  gave  them,} 


meaning,  you  are  not  allowed  to  bother  or  pressure  your  wives 
to  end  this  situation  by  giving  you  back  the  Mahr  and  any 
gifts  that  you  have  given  them  (in  return  for  divorce). 
Similarly,  Allah  said: 


'if  t 


4... and  you  should  not  treat  them  with  harshness,  that  you 
may  take  away  part  of  what  you  have  given  them,  unless  they 
commit  open  illegal  sexual  intercourse .}  (4:19) 

However,  if  the  wife  willingly  gives  back  anything  with  a  good 
heart,  then  Allah  said  regarding  this  situation: 

tel  te*  <4  }IA  if-  iff  0$} 

4  ■  ■  ■but  if  they,  of  their  own  good  pleasure,  remit  any  part  of  it 
to  you,  take  it,  and  enjoy  it  without  fear  of  any  harm.}  (4:4) 


Allowing  KhuVand  the  Return  of  the  Mahr  in  that  Case 

When  the  spouses  have  irreconcilable  differences  wherein  the 
wife  ignores  the  rights  of  the  husband,  dislikes  him  and 

111  At-Tabari  4  :543 . 


638 


Tafsir  fbn  Kathtr 


becomes  unable  to  live  with  him  any  longer,  she  is  allowed  to 
free  herself  (from  married  life)  by  giving  him  back  what  he  had 
given  her  (in  gifts  and  Mahr).  There  is  no  sin  on  her  in  this 
case  nor  on  him  if  he  accepts  such  offer.  This  is  why  Allah 
said: 


ojf  %  uii-  <4  m  o'  ^  &&  %  Wife  J  jJ 

4*4 (  iSf  £4  vi  if  yil  &  Vf  ^4 


4A«d  if  is  noi  lawful  far  you  (men)  to  take  back  (front  your 
wives)  any  of  what  you  gave  them,  except  when  both  parties 
fear  that  they  would  be  unable  to  keep  the  limits  ordained  by 
Alldit  (e.g.,  to  deal  with  each  other  on  a  fair  basis).  Thett  if  you 
fear  that  they  would  not  be  able  to  keep  the  limits  ordained  by 
Allah,  then  there  is  no  sin  on  either  of  them  if  she  gives  back.} 


Sometimes,  the  woman  has  no  valid  reason  and  she  still 
asks  for  her  marriage  to  be  ended.  In  this  case,  Ibn  Jarir 
reported  that  Thawban  said  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said: 


i»ul j  1*4  {^4*  ti  fs-  J  UVi»  J j 


4 Any  woman  who  asks  her  husband  far  divorce  without 
justification,  then  the  scent  of  Paradise  will  be  forbidden  far 
/ler.of1* 


At-Tirmidhi  recorded  this  Hadith  and  stated  that  it  is 
Hasan. ,2) 

Ibn  Jarir  said  that  the  Ayah  (2:229)  was  revealed  about 
Thabit  bin  Qays  bin  Shammas  and  his  wife  Hablbah  bint 
‘Abdullah  bin  Ubayy  bin  Salul.*3'  In  his  Muwatta',  Imam  Malik 
reported  that  Hablbah  bint  Sahl  Al-Ansariyah  was  married  to 
Thabit  bin  Qays  bin  Shammas  and  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jg 
once  went  to  the  Fajr  (Dawn)  prayer  and  found  Hablbah  bint 
Sahl  by  his  door  in  the  dark.  Allah’s  Messenger  *g  said,  “Who  is 
this?”  She  said,  “I  am  Hablbah  bint  Sahl,  O  Messenger  of 
Allah!”  He  said,  “What  is  the  matter?”  She  said,  “I  and  Thabit 
bin  Qays”,  meaning,  (she  can  no  longer  be  with)  her  husband. 
When  her  husband  Thabit  bin  Qays  came,  Allah’s  Messenger 


f1*  At-Tabari  4:569. 

Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  4  :367 . 
131  At-Tabari  4:556. 


said  to  him: 


<1>!  •&'  U  i  JJ  *~r*"  5'^A'1 

nThis  is  Habibah  bint  Sahl,  she  said  what  Allah  has  permitted 


her  to  sayJ 

tfablbah  also  said,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah!  I  still  have 
everything  he  gave  me.”  Allah’s  Messenger  said: 


a  Take  it  from  /ier.»  So,  he  took  it  from  her  and  she  remained 

in  her  family’s  house. ”,1)  __  |2, 

This  was  reported  by  Alimad,  Abu  Dawud  and  An-Nasal. 
Al-Bukhari  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  the  wife  of 
Thabit  bin  Qays  bin  Shammas  came  to  the  Prophet  sg  and 
said,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah!  I  do  not  criticize  his  religion  or 
mannerism.  But  I  hate  committing  Kufr  in  Islam  (by  ignoring 
his  rights  on  her).”  Allah’s  Messenger  said: 


*Will  you  give  him  back  his  garden ?» 

She  said,  “Yes.”  Allah’s  Messenger  said: 

C  2  5 . 1  AJj _L>tJ  I 

dTrt/ce  back  the  garden  and  divorce  her  once.»|31 
An-Nasal  also  recorded  it J4* 


The  ‘Iddah  (Waiting  Period)  for  the  KhuV 

At-Tirmidhi  reported  that  Rubayi*  bint  Mu'awwidh  bin  ‘Afra’ 
got  a  Khul'  during  the  time  of  Allah’s  Messenger  ag  and  the 
Prophet  jg  ordered  her  to  wait  for  one  menstruation  period  for 
‘Iddah.[5] 


Transgressing  the  set  limits  of  Allah  is  an  Injustice 

Allah  said: 


W  Al-Muwattci  2 :564 . 

121  Ahmad  6 :433 ,  Abu  Dawud  2 :667 ,  An-Nasal  6 : 169 . 
131  Fath  Al-Bari  9:306. 

!4'  An-Nasal  6:169. 

,5'  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  4 :363 . 


(**  -llpljll  <I>*  JJJ*.  ,j*J  Vi  -i'  ijii- 


iThese  are  the  limits  ordained  by  Allah,  so  do  not  transgress 
them.  And  whoever  transgresses  the  limits  ordained  by  Allah, 
then  such  are  the  wrongdoers 

This  means  that  the  laws  that  Allah  has  legislated  Eire  His 
set  limits,  so  do  not  transgress  them.  An  authentic  Hadith 
states: 


Vi  ^ J  t  Vi  (_raSly  1  Vi  J>-  -0J l  jU 

®  \  l — ’  Vi  O  U — .  jj.  t  i  oiwj  i 


“A/lo/i  /ws  sef  some  limits,  so  do  not  transgress  them;  and 
commanded  some  commands,  so  do  not  ignore  them;  and  made 
some  things  unlawful,  so  do  not  commit  them .  He  has  also  left 
some  matters  (without  rulings)  as  a  mercy  with  you,  not 
because  He  has  forgotten  them,  so  do  not  ask  about  them  .n*1* 


Pronouncing  Three  Divorces  at  the  same  Time  is 
Unlawful 

The  last  Ayah  we  mentioned  was  used  as  evidence  to  prove 
that  it  is  not  allowed  to  pronounce  three  divorces  at  one  time. 
What  further  proves  this  ruling  is  that  Mahmud  bin  Labld  has 
stated  -  as  An-Nasal  recorded  -  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jgj  was 
told  about  a  man  who  pronounced  three  divorces  on  His  wife  at 
one  time,  so  the  Prophet  stood  up  while  angry  and  said: 

J&\  &  ti \j  jil  IS#* 

*The  Book  of  Allah  is  being  made  the  subject  of  jest  while  I  am 
still  amongst  you?» 

A  man  then  stood  up  and  said,  “Should  I  kill  that  man,  O 
Messenger  of  Allah?”*2* 

The  Wife  cannot  be  taken  back  after  the  Third  Divorce 

Allah  said: 

'r-Jj  ,1s*-  irt  £  J4  V* 

***  Ad-Daraqutni  4 :298 . 

*2*  An-Nasal  6:142. 


641 


Sura!l  2.  Al-Baaarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 

iAnd  if  he  has  divorced  her  (the  third  time),  then  she  is  not 
lawful  for  hint  thereafter  until  she  has  married  another 
husband. $ 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  if  the  man  divorces  his  wife  for  the 
third  time  after  he  divorced  her  twice,  then  she  will  no  longer 
be  allowed  for  marriage  to  him.  Allah  said: 

4  m*  £J3 

i... until  she  has  married  another  husband.} 

meaning,  until  she  legally  marries  another  man.  For  instance, 
if  she  has  sexual  intercourse  with  any  man,  even  her  master 
(if  she  was  a  servant),  she  would  still  be  ineligible  for  marriage 
for  her  ex-husband  (who  divorced  her  thrice),  because 
whomever  she  had  sexual  relations  with  was  not  her  legal 
husband.  If  she  marries  a  man  without  consummating  the 
marriage,  she  will  not  be  eligible  for  her  ex-husband.  Muslim 
reported  that  ‘Alshah  said  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  was 
asked  about  a  woman  who  marries  a  man  who  thereafter 
divorces  her  (thrice).  She  then  marries  another  man  and  he 
divorces  her  before  he  has  sexual  relations  with  her,  would  she 
be  allowed  for  her  first  husband?  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said: 

«No,  until  he  enjoys  her  'Usaylah  (sexual  relation) 

Al-Bukhari  also  reported  this  Hadith .*21 

Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  ‘A’ishah  said,  “The  wife  of 
Rifa’ah  Al-Qurazi  came  while  I  and  Abu  Bakr  were  with  the 
Prophet  jg  and  she  said,  *1  was  Rifa’ah’s  wife,  but  he  divorced 
me  and  it  was  an  irrevocable  divorce.  Then  I  married  ‘Abdur- 
Rahman  bin  Az-Zubayr,  but  his  sexual  organ  is  minute  like  a 
string.’  She  then  took  a  small  string  of  her  garment  (to 
resemble  how  small  his  sexual  organ  was).  Khalid  bin  Said  bin 
Al-‘As,  who  was  next  to  the  door  and  was  not  yet  allowed  in, 
said,  ‘O  Abu  Bakr!  Why  do  you  not  forbid  this  (woman)  from 
what  she  is  revealing  frankly  before  the  Prophet?’  The  Prophet 
jg  merely  smiled.  Then,  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  asked  her: 


111  Muslim  2:1057. 

121  FothAI-Bdri9:284. 


642 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


leJ-  j'  it-ks  V^“ 


a  Do  i/ow  TOfl«f  fo  remarry  Rijd'ah?  You  cannot  unless  you 
experience  his  'Usaylah  and  he  experiences  your  'Usaylah  (i.e., 
had  a  complete  sexual  relation  with  your  present  husband)  .a”11’ 

Al-Bukhari,  Muslim,  and  An-Nasal  also  recorded  this 
Hadith)2^  Muslim’s  wording  is  "Rifa'ah  divorced  his  wife  for 
the  third  and  final  time." 

The  word  ‘Usaylah  mentioned  in  the  Hadith  means  sexual 
intercourse.  Imam  Ahmad  and  An-Nasal  reported  that  ‘Alshah 
said  that  Allah’s  Messenger  said: 

'±Ji\  U  vl# 

c  ^  * 

«' Usaylah  is  sexual  intercourse .»[31 


The  Curse  on  the  Participants  of  Tahlil/Halalah 

The  reason  for  the  woman  (who  was  divorced  thrice)  to 
marry  another  man  must  be  that  the  man  desires  her  and  has 
the  intention  of  having  an  extended  married  life  with  her. 
These  are  the  legal  goals  and  aims  behind  marriage.  If  the 
reason  behind  the  second  marriage  was  to  make  the  woman 
eligible  for  her  ex-husband  again,  then  this  is  the  TahlH  that 
the  Hadiths  have  cursed  and  criticized.  In  addition,  when  the 
reason  behind  this  marriage  (if  it  was  Tahiti)  is  announced  in 
the  contract,  it  would  make  the  contract  invalid  according  to 
the  majority  of  the  scholars. 

Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  ‘Abdullah  bin  Mas‘ud  said, 
“Allah’s  Messenger  f§§  cursed  the  one  who  does  Tahiti,  the  one 
in  whose  favor  it  is  done,  those  who  eat  Riba  (usury)  and  those 
who  feed  it  (pay  the  usury).”141  At-Tirmidhi  and  An-Nasal 
reported  this  Hadith^5'1  and  At-Tirmidhi  said,  “This  Hadith  is 
Hasan."  He  said,  “This  is  what  is  acted  upon  according  to 
people  of  knowledge  among  the  Companions,  among  whom  are 

11 1  Ahmad  6:34 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  10 :518,  Muslim  2 :1057,  An-Nasal  6 :146. 

Ahmad  6 :62 . 

141  Ahmad  1:448. 

I5'  Ahmad  1 :448 ,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  4 :268 ,  An-Nasal  6 : 149 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Bagarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) _ 643 

‘Umar,  TJthman  and  Ibn  ‘Umar.  It  was  also  the  saying  of  the 
scholars  of  Fiqh  among  the  Tabi'in  (second  generation  of  Islam). 
And  it  has  been  reported  from  ‘Ali,  Ibn  Mas*Qd  and  Ibn  ‘Abbas”. 

In  his  Mustadrak,  Al-Hakim  reported  that  Nafi‘  said:  “A  man 
came  to  Ibn  ‘Umar  and  asked  him  about  a  man  who  divorced 
his  wife  three  times.  Then,  his  brother  married  her  to  make 
Tahiti  for  his  brother,  without  the  brother  knowing  this  fact. 
He  then  asked,  “Is  she  allowed  for  the  first  (husband)?"  He 
said,  “No,  unless  it  is  a  marriage  that  involves  desire.  We  used 
to  consider  this  an  act  of  adultery  during  the  time  of  Allah’s 
Messenger  *£.”  Al-Hakim  said,  “This  Hadith  has  a  Sahth  chain 
although  they  (Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim)  did  not  record  it.”1'1  The 
wording  of  this  IJadith  indicates  that  the  ruling  came  from  the 
Prophet  m,.  Abu  Bakr  bin  Abu  Shaybah,  Al-Jawzjani,  Harb  Al- 
Kirmani  and  Abu  Bakr  Al-Athram  said  that  Qabisah  bin  Jabir 
said  that  ‘Umar  said,  “If  the  participants  to  Tahiti  are  brought 
to  me,  I  will  have  them  stoned.”*2* 

When  does  a  Woman  who  was  divorced  Three  Times 
become  Eligible  for  Her  First  Husband 

Allah  said: 

iAnd  if  he  has  divorced  her }  meaning,  the  second  husband  after 
he  had  complete  sexual  relations  with  her, 

i  H  is  no  sin  on  both  of  them  that  they  reunite ^  meaning,  the  wife 
and  her  first  husband, 

1«-j>  o> 

iprovided  they  feel  that  tltey  can  keep  the  limits  ordained  by  Allah.  > 
meaning,  they  live  together  honorably.  Mujahid  said,  “If  they 
are  convinced  that  the  aim  behind  their  morriage  is 
honorable.”*3*  Next,  Allah  said: 

111  Al-Hakim  2:199. 

*2*  Ibn  Abi  Shaybah  4 :294 . 

*3*  At-Tabari  4  :598 . 


644 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


J 


mm 


rv 


mm 

*rv * 


jl  04^  0&?  '&fi  '  ij J 

•  i/'i''  i  >  .-  K"»  ^  ^  .  >*-"  $>>+■' 

iy*jt>ljAj\jJ±j&  blrf *J  ^Jj^Cj^JPZr* 
\jj)l  \j  VjJA  fii\  cJjfi  Ij  Aia  dJJ’ i 

S^Cr*  “;  |>v»lr> ' 

<S&»j3l9  ^i>y Oji'j  A«£f&s 
^  $  Sy&ri 

*#& is&^fj 
*»s£i^*- li 

qVjC^fr  L? 

XS  ^Ulll J  jf  jjjJ 
'SjCuVrSil  i>^  V^AcXjiu'  ijij^  ^-l^-V  « 


^  iTItese  are  the  limits 
of  Allah, $  His 
commandments  and 
legislation, 


iHe  makes  plaint 

it>s&.  ff& 

ifor  the  people  who  have 
knowledge. $ 

V&  'j&  &$  "f&  v>v$ 

&&  1  &*  <D$& 

6te  c&J  %  9&\ 

jU»  Jui  iiid'i  o  i>*j 

!»>  f-'-t ,  ^  */}' 

Aill  C*jI»  IjJjgili  JJ  A^.»4J 

$  tj  &  Z2,  ii'ilj 

*&*£  <J$ji  ^  £& 

3  gfes  3  \M  4  j& 

4#(cjf  s<£  &  s» 

4231.  And  when 
you  have  divorced  women  and  they  have  fulfilled  the  term  of 
their  prescribed  period,  either  take  them  back  on  a  reasonable 
basis  or  set  them  free  on  a  reasonable  basis.  But  do  not  take 
them  back  to  hurt  them,  and  whoever  does  that,  then  he  has 
wronged  himself.  And  treat  not  the  verses  (Laws)  of  Allah  in 
jest,  but  remember  Allah's  favors  on  you  (i.e.,  Islam),  and  that 
which  He  has  sent  down  to  you  of  the  Book  (i.e.,  the  Qur'an) 
and  Al-Hikmah  (the  Prophet's  Sunnah  -  legal  ways  -  Islamic 
jurisprudence)  whereby  He  instructs  you .  And  fear  Allah,  and 
know  that  Allah  is  All- Aware  of  everything^. 


Being  Kind  to  the  Divorced  Wife 

This  is  a  command  from  Allah  to  men  that  when  one  of 
them  divorces  his  wife  with  a  reversible  divorce,  he  should 


645 


Surah  2.  Al-Banarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


treat  her  kindly.  So  when  her  term  of  ‘Iddah  (waiting  period) 
nears  its  end,  he  either  takes  her  back  in  a  way  that  is  better, 
including  having  witnesses  that  he  has  taken  her  back,  and  he 
lives  with  her  with  kindness.  Or,  he  should  release  her  after 
her  ‘Iddah  finishes  and  then  kindly  asks  her  to  depart  from 
his  house,  without  disputing,  fighting  with  her  or  using  foul 
words.  Allah  then  said: 


iBut  do  not  take  them  back  to  hurt  them,} 

Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Mujahid,  Masruq,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Ad- 
Dahhak,  Ar-Rabl‘  and  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  said  that  a  man 
used  to  divorce  his  wife,  and  when  her  'Iddah  came  near  its 
end,  he  would  take  her  back  to  harm  her  and  to  stop  her  from 
marrying  someone  else.  He  then  divorced  her  and  she  would 
begin  her  ‘Iddah  and  when  her  ‘Iddah  term  neared  its  end,  he 
would  take  her  back  again,  so  that  the  term  of  ‘Iddah  would 
be  prolonged  for  her.  After  that,  Allah  prohibited  this 
practice.11’  Allah  has  also  threatened  those  who  indulge  in 
such  practices,  when  He  said; 

yjet  JjjJ  Jju» 

i...atid  whoever  does  that,  then  he  has  wronged  himself .} 

meaning,  by  defying  Allah’s  commandments. 

Allah  then  said: 


iAnd  treat  not  the  verses  (Laws)  of  Allah  in  a  jest,} 

Ibn  Jarir  said  that  Abu  Musa  (Al-Ash‘ari)  narrated  that 
Allah’s  Messenger  jg  once  became  angry  at  the  Ash'ari  tribe. 
Abu  Musa  went  to  him  and  said,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah!  Are 
you  angry  with  the  Ash‘ariyyin?”  The  Prophet  jg  said: 


i  lii  ,^-iJ 


-  i-  *  i7?  • : 

JL5  4  C,  ,aUr>  Jj 


!  c) 

$  Jt 


“One  of  you  says,  7  divorced  her'  -then  says-  7  took  her  back!' 
This  is  not  the  appropriate  way  Muslims  conduct  divorce. 


m  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :772-774. 


646 


Tafsir  Jbn  Kathir 

Divorce  the  woman  when  she  has  fulfilled  the  term  of  the 
prescribed  period.^ 

Masruq  said  that  the  Ayah  refers  to  the  man  who  harms  his 
wife  by  divorcing  her  and  then  taking  her  back,  so  that  the 
‘Iddah  term  is  prolonged  for  her.12*  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  ‘Ata’ 
Al-Khurasani,  Ar-Rabl‘  and  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  said,  “He  is 
the  man  who  divorces  his  wife  and  says,  1  was  joking.’  Or  he 
frees  a  servant  or  gets  married  and  says,  1  was  only  joking.’ 
Allah  revealed: 

iAnd  treat  not  the  verses  (Laws)  of  Allah  in  a  jest 

Then  such  men  were  made  to  bear  the  consequences  of  their 
actions. 

Allah  then  said: 

jit  i jfii\j) 

i...but  remember  Allah's  favors  on  you,) 
meaning,  by  His  sending  His  Messenger  jg  with  the  right 
guidance  and  clear  signs  to  you: 

4... and  that  which  He  has  sent  down  to  you  of  the  Book  (i.e.,  the 
Qur'an)  and  Al-Hikmah)  meaning  the  Sunnah, 

4 4 

i . .  .whereby  He  instructs  you.) 

meaning,  commands  you,  forbids  you  and  threatens  you  for 
transgressing  His  prohibitions.  Allah  said: 

)And  fear  Allah) 

meaning,  concerning  what  you  perform  and  what  you  avoid, 

jCs?’  d 

iand  know  that  Allah  is  All-Aware  of  every  thing .) 

111  At-Tabari  5:14. 

121  At-Jabari  5:8. 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :775,776. 


647 


Surah  2 ,  Al-Baqarah  (22 5  -  252)  (Part-2) 


none  of  your  secret  or  public  affairs  ever  escapes  His 
knowledge,  and  He  will  treat  you  accordingly. 


££  cJ  &L&  m  pi 

j&S  ’$)  jj?>  4J$J  </£>  J&i  V?  J*  Juji  iil'i 


4232.  And  when  you  have  divorced  women  and  they  have 
fulfilled  the  term  of  their  prescribed  period,  do  not  prevent  them 
from  marrying  their  (former )  husbands,  if  they  mutually  agree 
on  reasonable  basis.  This  (instruction)  is  an  admonition  for  him 
among  you  who  believes  in  Allah  and  the  Last  Day.  That  is 
more  virtuous  and  purer  for  you.  Allah  knoivs  and  you  know 
not.} 


The  Wali  (Guardian)  of  the  Divorced  Woman  should  not 
prevent  Her  from  going  back  to  Her  Husband 

‘Ali  bin  Abu  Talhah  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “This 
Ayah  was  revealed  about  the  man  who  divorces  his  wife  once 
or  twice  and  her  'Iddah  finishes.  He  later  thinks  about  taking 
her  back  in  marriage  and  the  woman  also  wishes  that,  yet,  her 
family  prevents  her  from  remarrying  him.  Hence,  Allah 
prohibited  her  family  from  preventing  her.”  Masruq,  Ibrahim 
An-Nakhal,  Az-Zuhri  and  Ad-Dahhak  stated  that  this  is  the 
reason  behind  revealing  the  Ayah  (2:232). 111  These  statements 
clearly  conform  to  the  apparent  meaning  of  the  Ayah. 


There  is  no  Marriage  without  a  Wali  (for  the  Woman) 

The  Ayah  (2:232)  also  indicates  that  the  woman  is  not 
permitted  to  give  herself  in  marriage.  Rather,  she  requires  a 
Wall  (guardian  such  as  her  father,  brother,  adult  son,  and  so 
forth)  to  give  her  away  in  marriage,  as  Ibn  Jarir  and  At- 
Tirmidhi  have  stated  when  they  mentioned  this  Ayah.  Also,  a 
Hadith  states  that: 


( TJy  i frjy  Vj  Sl^Jl  £jy  V1 


m 


At-Tabari  5 :22 ,23 . 


648 


Tafsfr  Ibn  Kathir 

*The  woman  does  not  give  another  woman  away  for  marriage 
and  the  woman  does  not  give  herself  away  in  marriage ,  for  only 
tire  adulteress  gives  herself  away  for  marriage. 

Another  Hadith  states: 

a No  marriage  is  valid  except  with  the  participation  of  a  mature 
Wali  and  two  trustworthy  witnesses.^2' 


The  Reason  behind  revealing  the  Ayah  (2:232) 


It  was  reported  that  this  Ayah  was  revealed  about  Ma‘qil  bin 
Yasar  Al-Muzani  and  his  sister.  Al-Bukhari  reported  in  his 
Sahlh ,  when  he  mentioned  the  Tafsir  of  this  Ayah  (2:232),  that 
the  husband  of  the  sister  of  Ma'qil  bin  Yasar  divorced  her.  He 
waited  until  her  *Iddah  finished  and  then  asked  to  remarry 
her,  but  Ma'qil  refused.  Then,  this  Ayah  was  sent  down: 


do  not  prevent  them  from  marrying  their  (former) 
husbands y3' 

Abu  Dawud,  At-Tirmidhi,  Ibn  Abu  H&tim,  Ibn  Jarir  and  Ibn 
Marduwyah  and  Al-Bayhaqi  reported  this  Hadith  from  Al- 
Hasan  from  Ma'qil  bin  Yasar.14*  At-Tirmidhi  rendered  this 
Hadith  authentic  and  in  his  narration,  Ma'qil  bin  Yasar  gave 
his  sister  in  marriage  for  a  Muslim  man  during  the  time  of 
Allah’s  Messenger  She  remained  with  him  for  a  while  and 
he  divorced  her  once  and  did  not  take  her  back  until  her  ‘Iddah 
finished.  They  then  wanted  to  get  back  with  each  other  and  he 
came  to  ask  her  for  marriage.  Ma'qil  said  to  him,  “O  ungrateful 
one!  I  honored  you  and  married  her  to  you  but  you  divorced 
her.  By  Allah!  She  will  never  be  returned  to  you.”  But  Allah 
knew  his  need  for  his  wife  and  her  need  for  her  husband  and 
He  revealed: 


111  Ibn  Majah  1 :606. 

Majma'  Az-Zawa’id.  4 :286 
131  Fath  Al-Bari  8 :40 . 

I4*  Abu  Dawud  2 :569 ,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8 :325 ,  Ibn  Abi  Hatim 
2:778,  At-Tabari  5:17-19,  Al-Bayhaqi  7 : 1 04 . 


Surah  2 .  Al-Bagaralt  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


649 


<Awf  when  you  have  divorced  women  and  they  have  fulfilled 
the  term  of  their  prescribed  period,) 

until  He  said: 

-i 


4... and. you  know  not.) 

When  Ma'qil  heard  the  Ayah,  he  said,  “I  hear  and  obey  my 
Lord.”  He  then  summoned  the  man  and  said,  “I  will  honor  you 
and  let  you  remarry  (my  sister).”1'1  Ibn  Marduwyah  added 
(that  Ma'qil  said),  “And  will  pay  (the  expiation)  for  breaking  my 
vow.”*2* 

Allah  said: 

iThis  (instruction)  is  an  admonition  for  him  among  you  ivho 
believes  in  Allah  and  the  Last  Day.) 

meaning,  prohibiting  you  from  preventing  the  women  from 
marrying  their  ex-husbands,  if  they  both  agree  to  it, 

iamong  you)  O  people, 

4 lytii) 

4who  believes  in  Allah  and  the  Last  Day.) 

meaning,  believes  in  Allah’s  commandments  and  fears  His 
warnings  and  the  torment  in  the  Hereafter.  Allah  said: 

i'tik  &  & 

iThat  is  more  virtuous  and  purer  for  you 

meaning,  obeying  Allah's  Law  by  returning  the  women  to  their 
ex-husbands,  and  abandoning  your  displeasure,  is  purer  and 
cleaner  for  your  hearts, 


^  TWi/at  Al-Ahwadhi  8 :  324 . 
Al-Bayhaqi  7:104. 


651 


Surah  2 ,  Al-Baqarah  ( 225  -  252)  (Part-2) 

only  after  two  years  of  age,  then  no  Tahrim  will  be  established. 
At-Tirmidhi  under  Chapter:  ‘Suckling  establishes  Tahrim 
within  the  first  two  years,’  reported  that  Umm  Salamah 
narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  sg  said: 

a^UaiJl  Jy  U  Nl  ^ 

« Suckling  establishes  Tahrim  if  it  is  on  the  breast  and  before 
Fitam  (before  weaning,  i.e.,  before  the  end  of  the  first  two 
years).  »*'* 

At-Tirmidhi  said,  "This  Hadith  is  Hasan  Sahlh.  The  majority 
of  the  people  of  knowledge  among  the  Companions  of  Allah’s 
Messenger  sg  and  others  acted  upon  this,  that  is  that  suckling 
establishes  Tahrim  (prohibition  in  marriage)  before  the  end  of 
the  two  years  and  that  whatever  occurs  after  that  does  not 
establish  Tahrim".  At-Tirmidhi  is  alone  in  recording  this  Hadith 
and  the  narrators  in  its  chain  meet  the  criteria  of  the 
Sahihayn.  The  Prophet’s  statement: 

J  b\S  U  Vl» 

“On  the  breast »  refers  to  the  organ  of  suckling  before  the  two 
years.  Imam  Ahmad  reported  a  Hadith  in  which  Al-Bara’  bin 
‘Azib  narrated,  “When  Ibrahim,  the  Prophet’s  son,  died,  the 
Prophet  jg  said: 

“My  son  has  died  on  the  breast  and  he  has  someone  to  suckle 
him  in  Paradise.®12* 

Furthermore,  Ad-Daraqutni  related  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that 
Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said: 

« Suckling  establishes  Tahrim  only  within  the  (first)  two 
years. 

Imam  Malik  reported  this  Hadith  from  Thawr  bin  Zayd  who 
narrated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  related  it  to  the  Prophet  jg.'4*  Ad- 

111  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  4 :313 . 

,2)  'Umdat  At-Tafsir  1 : 126 . 

*3’  Ad-Daraqutni  4 : 1 74 . 

*4*  Al-Muwatta’  2 :602 . 


652 


Tgfstr  Ibn  Kathir 


Dar&wardi  reported  this  Hadith  from  Thawr  who  narrated  it 
from  ‘Ikrimah  who  narrated  it  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas.  In  this 
narration,  which  is  more  authentic,  he  added: 

j 

“Whatever  occurs  after  the  two  years  is  not  considered . » 

Suckling  beyond  the  Two  Years 

It  is  reported  in  the  Sahih  that  ‘Alshah  thought  that  if  a 
woman  gives  her  milk  to  an  older  person  (meaning  beyond  the 
age  of  two  years)  then  this  will  establish  Tahrimft^  This  is  also 
the  opinion  of  ‘Ata’  bin  Abu  Rabah  and  Layth  bin  Sa‘d.  Hence, 
‘Alshah  thought  that  it  is  permissible  to  suckle  the  man 
whom  the  woman  needs  to  be  allowed  in  her  house.  She  used 
as  evidence  the  Hadith  of  Salim,  the  freed  slave  of  Abu 
Hudhayfah,  where  the  Prophet  ordered  Abu  Hudhayfah’s 
wife  to  give  some  of  her  milk  to  Salim,  although  he  was  a  man, 
and  ever  since  then,  he  used  to  enter  her  house  freely. 
However,  the  rest  of  the  Prophet’s  wives  did  not  agree  with  this 
opinion  and  thought  that  this  was  only  a  special  case.*21  This  is 
also  the  opinion  of  the  majority  of  the  scholars. 


Suckling  for  Monetary  Compensation 

Allah  said: 


4  ■  -but  the  father  of  the  child  shall  bear  the  cost  of  the  mother's 
food  and  clothing  on  a  reasonable  basis .  ^ 


meaning,  the  father  of  the  baby  is  obliged  to  provide  for  the 
expenses  of  the  mother  and  to  buy  her  clothes,  in  reasonable 
amounts  usually  used  by  similar  women  in  that  area,  without 
extravagance  or  stinginess.  The  father  spends  within  his 
means  in  this  case.  Allah  said  in  another  Ayah: 


'll)  Oi  loti  lull  id*  Id  iijij 


->■?*  crj  ji 


/  *>  tt*  *****  7" 


4 Let  the  rich  man  spend  according  to  his  means ;  and  the  man 

^  Muslim  2 : 1077. 

f21  Abu  Dawud  2  :549 ,550 . 


653 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (22 5  -  252)  (Part-2) 

whose  resources  are  restricted,  let  him  spend  according  to  what 
Allah  has  given  him.  Allah  puts  no  burden  on  any  person 
beyond  what  He  has  given  him.  Allah  will  grant  after  hardship, 
ease.}  (65:7) 

Ad-Dahhak  commented,  “If  the  husband  divorces  his  wife, 
with  whom  he  had  a  child,  and  she  suckles  that  child,  he  is 
required  to  provide  for  the  mother’s  expenses  and  clothes 
within  reason.”111 

No  Darar  (Harm)  or  Dir  dr  (Revenge) 

Allah  said: 

*'S  i} 

4No  mother  shall  be  treated  unfairly  on  account  of  her  child,} 

meaning,  the  mother  should  not  decline  to  rear  her  child  to 
harm  its  father.  The  mother  does  not  have  the  right  to  refrain 
from  suckling  the  child  after  giving  birth,  unless  she  suckles 
him/her  the  milk  that  is  necessary  for  his/her  survival.  Later 
on,  she  is  allowed  to  give  up  custody  of  the  child  as  long  as 
she  does  not  do  that  intending  to  harm  the  father.  In  addition, 
the  father  is  not  allowed  to  take  the  child  from  his  mother  to 
harm  the  mother.  This  is  why  Allah  said: 

%  S4?  ** 

4-  •  .nor  father  on  account  of  his  child.} 

meaning,  by  taking  the  child  from  its  mother  intending  to 
harm  the  mother.  This  is  the  Tafsir  of  Mujahid,  Qatadah,  Ad- 
Dahhak,  Az-Zuhri,  As-Suddi,  Ath-Thawri  and  Ibn  Zayd,  and 
others  on  this  Ayah.*21 
Allah  then  said: 

jL  &} 

4And  on  the  (father's)  heir  is  incumbent  the  like  of  that  (which 
was  incutnbent  on  the  father).} 

meaning,  by  refraining  from  harming  the  relative  (of  the  father, 
i.e.,  his  infant),  as  Mujahid,  Ash-Sha'bi  and  Ad-Dahhak  stated. 


111  At-Tabari  5 :39 . 

121  At-Tabari  5:49,50. 


654 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

It  was  also  reported  that  (the  Ayah  requires)  the  inheritor  (of 
the  father)  to  spend  on  the  mother  of  the  child,  just  as  the 
father  was  spending,  and  to  preserve  her  rights  and  refrain 
from  harming  her,  according  to  the  Tafsir  of  the  majority  of 
the  scholars.  We  should  state  that  Ibn  Jarir  has  explained  this 
subject  in  detail  in  his  Tafsir  and  that  he  also  stated  that 
suckling  the  child  after  the  second  year  might  harm  the  child’s 
body  and  mind.  Sufyan  Ath-Thawri  narrated  that  ‘Alqamah 
asked  a  woman  who  was  suckling  her  child  after  the  second 
year  ended,  not  to  do  that.1'1 


Fitam  (weaning)  occurs  by  Mutual  Consent 

Allah  said: 


££  Cri  ^ 


ilf  they  both  decide  on  weaning,  by  mutual  consent,  and  after 
due  consultation,  there  is  no  sin  on  them.} 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  if  the  father  and  the  mother  decide 
on  the  Fitam  (weaning)  before  the  two  years  (of  suckling)  end, 
and  for  a  benefit  that  they  duly  discuss  and  agree  upon,  then 
there  is  no  sin  in  this  case.  So,  the  Ayah  indicates  that  one 
parent  is  not  allowed  to  make  this  kind  of  decision  without 
duly  consulting  the  other  parent,  as  stated  by  Ath-Thawri.  The 
method  of  mutual  consultation  protects  the  child’s  interests.  It 
is  also  a  mercy  from  Allah  to  His  servants,  for  He  has 
legislated  the  best  method  for  parents  to  rear  their  children, 
and  His  legislation  guides  and  directs  the  parents  and  the 
children  to  success.  Similarly,  Allah  said  in  Surat  At-Talaq 
(chapter  65  in  the  Qur’an): 


£-£A-»  o\s  iJyJj  of} 


iThen  if  tltey  give  suck  to  the  children  for  you,  give  them  their 
due  payment,  and  let  each  of  you  accept  the  advice  of  the  other 
in  a  just  way.  But  if  you  make  difficulties  for  one  another,  then 
some  other  woman  may  give  suck  for  him  (the  father  of  the 
child).}  (65:6) 

Allah  then  said: 


Ml 


At-Tabari  5 :36 . 


655 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


J 


mm  rA  im» 

! iJ^BoVS  {&  c&j 

,*yS  i^iSvJ  >  ^L-,^*-  »  -UA  \y*y*$J 

.  >  t  *'  \  ,’-  '*  .Miff  i •"  tf£$i 

^^ilU  ^  ^ Jal  1  ^  O^J  ^o)\  o  JU£-  o  JiS 

j^s  £ 


V. 


4  And  i/  you  decide  on  a 
fos ter  suckli ng-mo t he r 
for  your  children ,  there 
is  no  sin  on  you,  pro¬ 
vided  you  pay  (the 
mother)  what  you  agreed 
(to  give  her)  on  a  rea¬ 
sonable  basis.  $> 
meaning,  if  the 
mother  and  the  father 
both  agree  that  the 
father  assumes 
custody  of  the  child 
due  to  a 
circumstance  that 
compels  her  or  allows 
him  to  do  so,  then 
there  is  no  sin  in  this 
case.  Hence,  the 
mother  is  allowed  to 
give  up  the  child  and 
the  father  is  allowed  to  assume  custody  of  the  child.  The 
father  should  kindly  give  the  mother  her  expenses  for  the 
previous  period  (during  which  she  reared  and  suckled  the 
child),  and  he  should  seek  other  women  to  suckle  his  child  for 
monetary  compensation.  Thereafter,  Allah  said: 


'5j tZxk'&ti*''' 


$'M  &  p)  ^ 

15  pk.  >Sj  •* 

^  P* 


iAnd  fear  Allah)  meaning,  in  all  of  your  affairs, 

$)&  ^  SSrt  ^ 

iAud  know  that  Allah  is  All-Seer  of  what  you  do.)  meaning, 
none  of  your  affairs  or  speech  escapes  His  perfect  Watch. 


656 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 


4234.  And  those  of  you  who  die  and  leave  wives  behind  them , 
they  (the  wives)  shall  wait  (as  regards  their  marriage)  for  four 
montits  and  ten  days ,  then  when  they  have  fulfilled  their  tertnf 
there  is  no  sin  on  you  if  they  (the  wives)  dispose  of  themselves 
in  a  (just  and)  honorable  manner  ( i.e they  can  marry).  And 
Allah  is  well-acquainted  with  what  you  do.} 

The  * Iddah  (Waiting  Period)  of  the  Widow 

This  Ayah  contains  a  command  from  Allah  to  the  wives 
whose  husbands  die,  that  they  should  observe  a  period  of 
‘ Iddah  of  four  months  and  ten  nights,  including  the  cases 
where  the  marriage  was  consummated  or  otherwise,  according 
to  the  consensus  (of  the  scholars). 

The  proof  that  this  ruling  includes  the  case  where  the 
marriage  was  not  Consummated  is  included  in  the  general 
meaning  of  the  Ayah.  In  a  narration  recorded  by  Imam  Ahmad 
and  the  compilers  of  the  Stman,  which  At-Tirmidhi  graded 
Sahihy  Ibn  Mas'ud  was  asked  about  a  man  who  married  a 
woman,  but  he  died  before  consummating  the  marriage.  He 
also  did  not  appoint  a  Mahr  (dowry)  for  her.  They  kept  asking 
Ibn  Mas'ud  about  this  subject  until  he  said,  “I  shall  give  you 
my  own  opinion,  and  if  it  is  correct  then  it  is  from  Allah,  while 
if  it  is  wrong  it  is  because  of  my  error  and  because  of  (the  evil 
efforts  of)  Satan.  In  this  case,  Allah  and  His  Messenger  are 
innocent  of  my  opinion.  She  has  her  full  Mahr”  In  another 
narration,  Ibn  Mas*ud  said,  "She  has  a  similar  Mahr  to  that  of 
the  women  of  her  status,  without  stinginess  or  extravagance.” 
He  then  continued,  “She  hais  to  spend  the  Iddah  and  has  a 
right  to  the  inheritance.”  Ma'qil  bin  Yasar  Ashja^i  then  stood 
up  and  said,  “I  heard  Allah’s  Messenger  issue  a  similar 
judgment  for  the  benefit  of  Barwa'  bint  Washiq.  ”  'Abdullah  bin 
Mas'ud  became  very  delighted  upon  hearing  this  statement.  In 
another  narration,  several  men  from  Ashja*  (tribe)  stood  up  and 
said,  "We  testify  that  Allah’s  Messenger  issued  a  similar 
ruling  for  the  benefit  of  Barwa'  bint  Washiq.”111 

111  Ahmad  3:480,  Abu  DSwud  2:588,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  4:299,  An- 
Nasal  6 : 198 ,  Ibn  Majah  1 :609 . 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


657 


As  for  the  case  of  the  widow  whose  husband  dies  while  she 
is  pregnant,  her  term  of  ‘Iddah  ends  when  she  gives  birth, 
even  if  it  occurs  an  instant  (after  her  husband  dies).  This 
ruling  is  taken  from  Allah’s  statement: 


S  m  S  S 

O^i 


4 And  for  those  who  are  pregnant,  their  'Iddah  is  until  they  lay 
down  their  burden.}  (65:4) 

There  is  also  a  Hadith  from  Subay'ah  Al-Aslamiyah  in  the  Two 
Sahihs,  through  various  chains  of  narration.  Her  husband,  Sa'd 
bin  Khawlah,  died  while  she  was  pregnant  and  she  gave  birth 
only  a  few  nights  after  his  death.  When  she  finished  her  Nifas 
(postnatal  period),  she  beautified  herself  for  those  who  might 
seek  to  engage  her  (for  marriage).  Then,  Abu  Sanabil  bin  Ba*kak 
came  to  her  and  said,  “Why  do  I  see  you  beautified  yourself,  do 
you  wish  to  marry?  By  Allah!  You  will  not  marry  until  the  four 
months  and  ten  nights  have  passed.”  Subay'ah  said,  “When  he 
said  that  to  me,  I  collected  my  garments  when  night  fell  and 
went  to  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  and  asked  him  about  this  matter. 
He  said  that  my  ‘Iddah  had  finished  when  I  gave  birth  and 
allowed  me  to  get  married  if  I  wished.”^ 


The  Wisdom  behind  legislating  the  * Iddah 

Said  bin  Musayyib  and  Abu  Al-'Aliyah  stated  that  the 
wisdom  behind  making  the  'Iddah  of  the  widow  four  months 
and  ten  nights  is  that  the  womb  might  contain  a  fetus.  When 
the  woman  waits  for  this  period,  it  will  become  evident  if  she 
is  pregnant.  Similarly,  there  is  a  Hadith  in  the  Two  Sahihs 
narrated  by  Ibn  Maslad  stating: 


viUUJI  aIJ)  jU  i  jJUj  jL  OjSZ  p 

“  (The  creation  of)  a  human  being  is  put  together  in  the  womb  of 
his  mother  in  forty  days  in  the  form  of  a  seed,  and  next  he 
becomes  a  clot  of  thick  blood  for  a  similar  period,  and  next  a. 
morsel  of  flesh  for  a  similar  period.  Then,  Allah  settds  an  angel 
who  is  ordered  to  breathe  life  unto  the  fetus .»*2* 


1 1 1  Path  Al-Bari  9 :379 ,  Muslim  2  : 1 1 22 . 
121  Fath  Al-Bari  1 3  :449 ,  Muslim  4 :2036 . 


658 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

So,  these  are  four  months  and  ten  more  days  to  be  sure,  as 
some  months  are  less  (than  thirty  days),  and  the  fetus  will 
then  start  to  show  signs  of  life  after  the  soul  has  been 
breathed  into  it.  Allah  knows  best. 


The  *Iddah  of  the  Slave  Mother  whose  Master  dies 

We  should  state  here  that  the  ‘Iddah  of  the  slave  mother  is 
the  same  in  the  case  of  death,  as  the  ‘ Iddah  of  the  free 
woman.  Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  'Amr  bin  A1-‘As  said,  “Do 
not  confuse  the  Sunnah  of  our  Prophet  for  us.  The  'Iddah  of 
the  mother,  who  is  also  a  servant,  when  her  master  dies,  is 
four  months  and  ten  nights.  ”*11 


Mourning  is  required  during  the  * Iddah  of  Death 

Allah  said: 


ll»  «S>'j  jUi  U-»  Vi  j+LJ 

/ >> 


4... then  when  they  have  fulfilled  their  term,  there  is  no  sin  on 
you  if  they  (the  zoives)  dispose  of  themselves  in  a  (just  and) 
honorable  manner  (i.e.,  they  can  marry).  And  Allah  is  well- 
acquainted  with  what  you  do.} 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  mourning  for  the  dead  husband  is 
required  until  the  'Iddah  is  finished.  It  is  also  reported  in  the 
Two  Sahlhs  that  Umm  Hablbah  and  Zaynab  bint  Jahsh 
narrated  that  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said: 


(J*  %  “7^  ji  jilt; 

gjj 


«/f  is  not  lawful  for  a  woman  who  believes  in  Allah  and  the 
Last  Day  to  mourn  for  more  than  three  days  for  any  dead 
person  except  her  husband,  for  ivhom  she  mounts  for  four 
months  and  ten  days  .»12’ 


It  is  reported  in  the  Two  Sahlhs  that  Umm  Salamah  said 
that  a  woman  said,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah!  My  daughter’s 
husband  died  and  she  is  complaining  about  her  eye,  should 


111  Ahmad  4:302,  Abu  Dawud  2:370,  Ibn  Majah  1 :673. 
121  Fath  Al-Bari  9 :394 ,  Muslim  2 : 1 123 . 


659 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


we  administer  kohl  in  her  eye?”  He  said,  “No,”  several  times 
upon  repeating  this  question.  He  then  said: 


2"  *  i*.  • "  .  '  *  '  >  '  •  *  Z  *  Z  z 

Jj  J  fc  J  1  ixjjl  JyA  LftjU 


«/f  is  four  months  and  ten  (nights)!  During  the  Jahiliyyali,  one 
of  you  would  mourn  for  an  entire  year  .n*11 

Zaiynab  the  daughter  of  Umm  Salamah  said  (about  the  pre- 
Islamic  era  of  ignorance),  “When  the  woman’s  husband  died, 
she  would  go  into  seclusion  and  would  wear  the  worst  clothes 
she  has.  She  would  refrain  from  wearing  perfume  or  any 
adornments  until  a  year  passed.  She  would  then  come  out  of 
seclusion  and  would  be  given  dung  that  she  would  throw. 
Then  an  animal  would  be  brought  out,  a  donkey,  a  sheep,  or  a 
bird.  Then  some  blood  would  be  drained  from  it,  usually 
resulting  in  its  death.” 

In  short,  the  mourning  required  from  a  wife  whose  husband 
dies,  includes  not  using  beautification  aids,  such  as  wearing 
perfume  and  the  clothes  and  jewelry  that  encourage  the  men 
to  seek  marriage  from  the  woman.  All  widows  must  observe 
this  period  of  mourning  whether  they  are  young,  old,  free, 
servant,  Muslim  or  disbeliever,  as  the  general  meaning  of  the 
Ayah  indicates. 

Allah  also  said: 


i...then  when  they  have  fulfilled  their  term > 

meaning,  when  the  ‘Iddah  finishes,  according  to  Ad-Dahhak 
and  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas. 

ithere  is  no  sin  on  you »  Az-Zuhri  said,  “Meaning  her  Wali 
(guardian).” 

4  if  they  (the  wives)  dispose )> 

meaning,  the  women  whose  ‘Iddah  has  finished.  Al-‘Awfi  said 
that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “If  the  woman  is  divorced  or  if  her 


m 


Muslim  2:1124. 


660 


Tafsir  L bn  Kqthfr 


husband  dies  and  then  her  ' Iddah  term  ends,  there  is  no  sin 
that  she  beautifies  herself,  so  that  she  becomes  ready  for 
marriage  proposals.  This  is  the  way  ‘that  is  just  and 
honorable’.  ”  It  was  reported  that  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  gave  the 
same  explanation.111  Ibn  Jurayj  related  that  Mujahid  said: 


l&\  4  5US  Q  £&  0£  *} 


4... there  is  tto  sin  on  you  if  they  (the  wives)  dispose  of 
themselves  in  a  just  and  honorable  manner.} 


“refers  to  allowed  and  pure  (honorable)  marriage.”*21  It  was 

also  reported  that  Al-Hasan,  Az-Zuhri  and  As-Suddi  said  the 
(3) 


same.1' 


it  &  -4  2&ZJ  U  Q  fit  02  %} 

iSSi  j#a  t  ^  IjSjif  ol  $-  j  c&S  P 
■££(;  fM *  -4  u  (ft  -it  JJ  }CS  gr  £.  gv^jt 

^  it  SI 


^235.  And  there  is  no  sin  on  you  if  you  make  a  hint  of 
betrothal  or  conceal  it  in  yourself,  Allah  knows  that  you  will 
remember  them,  but  do  not  make  a  promise  (of  contract)  with 
them  in  secret  except  that  you  speak  an  honorable  saying.  And 
do  not  be  determined  on  the  marriage  bond  until  the  term 
prescribed  is  fulfilled.  And  know  that  Allah  knows  what  is  in 
your  minds,  so  fear  Him.  And  know  that  Allah  is  Oft- 
Forgiving,  Most  Forbearing.} 


Mentioning  Marriage  indirectly  during  the  * Iddah 

Allah  said: 

01 i  J } 

4And  there  is  no  sin  on  you} 

meaning,  to  indirectly  mention  marriage  to  the  widow  during 
the  term  of  ‘Iddah  for  her  deceased  husband.  Ath-Thawri, 
Shu'bah  and  Jarir  stated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said: 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2:812,813,  1:813. 
121  At-Tabari  5 :93 . 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2:814. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


661 


4A»d  f/iere  is  no  sin  on  you  if  you  make  a  hint  of  betrothal) 

“means  saying,  1  want  to  marry  and  I  am  looking  for  a  woman 
whose  qualities  are  such  and  such,’  thus  talking  to  her  in 
general  terms  in  a  way  that  is  better.”  In  another  narration  (by 
Ibn  ‘Abbas),  “Saying,  *1  wish  that  Allah  endows  me  with  a  wife,’ 
but  he  should  not  make  a  direct  marriage  proposal.”'1'  Al- 
Bukhari  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that  the  Ayah: 

U  Q  c£  ij¥ 


iAnd  there  is  no  sin  on  you  if  you  make  a  hint  of  betrothal ) 

means,  “The  man  could  say,  1  wish  to  marry,’  1  desire  a  wife,’ 
or,  1  wish  I  could  find  a  good  wife’.”121  Mujahid,  TawQs, 
Ikrimah,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Ibrahim  An-Nakhal,  Ash-Shalfi, 
Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Az-Zuhri,  Yazld  bin  Qusayt,  Muqatil  bin 
Hayyan  and  Al-Qasim  bin  Muhammad*3'  and  several  others 
among  the  Salaf  and  the  Imams  said  that  one  is  allowed  to 
mention  marriage  indirectly  to  the  woman  whose  husband 
died. 

It  is  also  allowed  to  indirectly  mention  marriage  to  a  woman 
who  had  gone  through  final,  irrevocable  divorce.  The  Prophet 
M  ordered  Fatimah  bint  Qays  to  remain  in  the  house  of  Ibn 
Umm  Maktum  for  ‘Iddah  when  her  husband  Abu  ‘Amr  bin  Hafs 
divorced  her  for  the  third  time.  He  said  to  her: 

« Inform  me  when  your  'Iddah  term  endsj 

When  she  finished  the  ‘Iddah,  Usamah  bin  Zayd,  the 
Prophet’s  freed  slave  asked  to  marry  her,  and  the  Prophet 
married  her  to  him.'4'  As  for  the  divorced  wife  (not  irrevocably 
divorced),  there  is  no  disagreement  that  it  is  not  allowed  for 
other  than  her  husband  to  mention  marriage  proposals  to  her 
directly  or  indirectly  (before  the  ‘Iddah  finishes).  Allah  knows 
best. 

11  ■  At-Tabari  5:95,  96. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  9 :84 . 

,3'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :8 1 7 ,8 1 8 
*4*  Muslim  2:1114. 


662 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlm 


Allah  said: 


4... or  conceal  it  in  yourself, $  meaning,  if  you  hide  the  intention 
of  seeking  marriage  with  them.  Similarly,  Allah  said: 

4And  your  Lord  ktunos  ivhat  their  breasts  conceal,  and  what 
they  reveal}  (28:69)  and: 

4 . .  .while  I  am  All-Aware  of  what  you  conceal  and  what  you 
reveal.}  (60:  1)  So,  Allah  said  here: 

jJCM  iSi  fe} 

4 Allah  knows  that  you  will  remember  them}  meaning,  in  your 
hearts,  so  He  made  it  easy  for  you.  Allah  then  said: 

4.. . but  do  not  make  a  promise  (of  contract)  with  them  in 
secret} 

‘Ali  bin  Abu  Talhah  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that 

}but  do  not  make  a  promise  (of  contract)  with  them  in  secret} 

means  do  not  say  to  her,  “I  am  in  love  (with  you),”  or, 
“Promise  me  you  will  not  many  someone  else  (after  the  ‘ Iddah 
finishes),”  and  so  forth. I1*  Said  bin  Jubayr,  Ash-Shahi, 
Ikrimah,  Abu  Ad-Duha,  Ad-Dahhak,  Az-Zuhri,*2'  Mujahid  and 
Ath-Thawri  said  that  it  (meaning  of  the  Ayah)  means  taking 
the  woman’s  promise  not  to  marry  someone  else.13’ 

Afterwards,  Allah  said: 

<3 '![} 

4 . .  .except  that  you  speak  an  honorable  saying.} 

1,1  At-Tabari  5:107. 

121  Ibn  Abiyatim  2  :821. 

131  At-Tabari  5:109. 


663 


Surah  2.  Al-Bagarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 

Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Mujahid,  Said  bin  Jubayr,*1*  As-Suddi,  Ath- 
Thawn  and  Ibn  Zayd  said  that  the  Ayah  means  to  indirectly 
refer  to  marriage,  such  as  saying,  “I  desire  someone  like 
you.”121  Muhammad  bin  Sirin  said:  I  asked  “Ubaydah  about 
the  meaning  of  Allah’s  statement: 


4... except  that  you  speak  an  honorable  saying .) 

He  said,  “He  says  to  her  Wali,  ‘Do  not  give  her  away  (in 
marriage)  until  you  inform  me  first’.”  This  statement  was 
narrated  by  Ibn  Abu  Hatim.13* 

Allah  then  said: 


4And  do  not  be  determined  on  the  marriage  bond  until  the  term 
prescribed  is  fulfilled.) 

meaning,  do  not  make  marriage  contracts  before  the  'lddah 
finishes.  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Mujahid,  Ash-Sha*bi,  Qatadah,  Ar-Rabl‘ 
bin  Anas,  Abu  Malik,  Zayd  bin  Aslam,  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan, 
Az-Zuhri,  ‘Ata’  Al-Khurasani,  As-Suddi,  Ath-Thawri  and  Ad- 
Dahhak  said  that: 

4%\  y  &) 


iuntil  the  term  prescribed  is  fulfilled .) 

means,  ‘Do  not  consummate  the  marriage  before  the  ‘lddah 
term  finishes.’14*  The  scholars  agree  that  marriage  contracts 
during  the  ‘lddah  are  invalid. 

Allah  then  said: 

4*aj ■,-«>*  U  jU m  J 

4Atid  know  that  Allah  knows  what  is  in  your  minds,  so  fear 
Him.) 

warning  the  men  against  the  ideas  they  conceal  in  their  hearts 
about  women,  directing  them  to  think  good  about  them  rather 


***  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2  :824. 

121  At-Tabari  5:114. 

*3*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :826 . 

*4*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :828 ,829 . 


664 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kgthir 


than  the  evil,  and  Allah  would  not  let  them  despair  of  His 
mercy,  as  He  said: 


JP  it 


4  And  know  that  Allah  is  Oft-Forgiving,  Most  Forbearing.} 


4236.  There  is  no  sin  on  you,  if  you  divorce  women  while  yet 
you  have  not  touched  them,  nor  appointed  for  them  their  due 
(dowry).  But  give  them  a  Mut'ah  (a  suitable  gift,  the  rich 
according  to  his  means,  and  the  poor  according  to  his  means,  a 
gift  of  reasonable  amount  is  a  duty  on  the  doers  of  good.} 


Divorce  before  consummating  the  Marriage 

Allah  allowed  divorce  after  the  marriage  contract  and  before 
consummating  the  marriage.  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Tawus,  Ibrahim  and 
Al-Hasan  Al-Basri  said  that  ‘touched’  (mentioned  in  the  Ayah) 
means  sexual  intercourse.111  The  husband  is  allowed  to 
divorce  his  wife  before  consummating  the  marriage  or  giving 
the  dowry  if  it  was  deferred. 


The  Mut'ah  (Gift)  at  the  time  of  Divorce 


Allah  commands  the  husband  to  give  the  wife  (whom  he 
divorces  before  consummating  the  marriage)  a  gift  of  a 
reasonable  amount,  the  rich  according  to  his  means  and  the 
poor  according  to  his  means,  to  compensate  her  for  her  loss. 
Al-Bukhari  reported  in  his  Sahih  that  Sahl  bin  Sa‘d  and  Abu 
Usayd  said  that  Allah’s  Messenger  married  Umaymah  bint 
Sharahil.  When  she  was  brought  to  the  Prophet  he  extended 
his  hand  to  her,  but  she  did  not  like  that.  The  Prophet  then 
ordered  Abu  Usayd  to  provide  provisions  for  her  along  with  a 
gift  of  two  garments.121 


J 


4-#  #2  olj  isif  [ j 


Jjut 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2:831. 
121  Fath  Al-Bari  9 :269 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


665 


4.^,  X-2*  3  6)^1* 

4237.  And  if  you  divorce  tiiem  before  you  have  touched  Quid  a 
sexual  relation  with)  them,  and  you  have  appointed  for  them 
their  due  (dowry),  then  pay  half  of  that,  unless  they  (the 
women)  agree  to  remit  it,  or  he  (the  husband),  in  whose  hands 
is  the  marriage  tie,  agrees  to  remit  it.  And  to  remit  is  nearer  to 
At-Taqwd  (piety,  righteousness).  And  do  not  forget  liberality 
between  yourselves .  Truly,  Allah  is  All-Seer  of  what  you  do.} 

The  Wife  gets  half  of  Her  Mahr  if  She  is  divorced  before 
the  Marriage  is  consummated 

This  honorable  Ayah  is  not  a  continuation  of  the  Mut'ah  (gift) 
that  was  mentioned  in  the  previous  Ayah  (i.e.,  divorce  before 
the  marriage  is  consummated).  This  Ayah  (2:237)  requires  the 
husband  to  relinquish  half  of  the  appointed  Mahr  if  he 
divorces  his  wife  before  the  marriage  is  consummated.  If  it  was 
discussing  any  other  type  of  gift,  then  it  would  have  been 
mentioned  that  way,  especially  when  this  Ayah  follows  the 
previous  Ayah  related  to  this  subject.  Allah  knows  best.  Giving 
away  half  of  the  bridal-money  in  this  case  is  the  agreed 
practice  according  to  the  scholars.  So,  the  husband  pays  half 
of  the  appointed  Mahr  if  he  divorces  his  wife  before 
consummating  the  marriage. 

Allah  then  said: 

4^>&  oi 

4 unless  they  (the  women)  agree  to  remit  it,} 

meaning,  the  wife  forfeits  the  dowry  and  relieves  the  husband 
from  further  financial  responsibility.  As-Suddi  said  that  Abu 
Salih  mentioned  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented  on  Allah’s 
statement: 

J  '*} 

4 unless  they  (the  women)  agree  to  remit  it,} 

“Unless  the  wife  forfeits  her  right.”1 11  Furthermore,  Imam  Abu 


111  Ibn  AbiHatim  2:839. 


666 _  Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

Muhammad  bin  Abu  Hatim  said  that  it  was  reported  that 
Shurayh,  Said  bin  Musayyib,  Ikrimah,  Mujahid,  Ash-Shalai, 
Al-Hasan,  Nafi‘,  Qatadah,  Jabir  bin  Zayd,  ‘Ata’  Al-Khurasani, 
Ad-Dahhak,  Az-Zuhri,  Muqatii  bin  Hayyan,  Ibn  Sirin,  Ar-Rabl‘ 
bin  Anas  and  As-Suddi  said  similarly.*1* 

Allah  then  said: 

fo 

4... or  he  (the  husband),  in  whose  hands  is  the  marriage  tie, 
agrees  to  remit  it.) 

Ibn  Abu  Hatim  reported  that  ‘Amr  bin  Shu'ayb  said  that  his 
grandfather  narrated  that  the  Prophet  sg  said: 

“The  husband  is  he  who  has  the  marriage  h'e.»*2’ 

Ibn  Marduwyah  also  reported  this  Hadith,  and  it  is  the  view 
chosen  by  Ibn  Jarir.  The  Hadith  states  that  the  husband  is 
the  person  who  really  holds  the  marriage  tie  in  his  hand,  as  it 
is  up  to  him  to  go  on  with  the  marriage  or  end  it.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  Wali  of  the  wife  is  not  allowed  to  give  away 
any  of  her  rightful  dues  without  her  permission,  especially  the 
dowry. 

Allah  then  stated: 

4Atid  to  remit  it  is  nearer  to  At-Taqrva  (piety,  righteousness) .) 

Ibn  Jarir  said,  “Some  scholars  said  that  this  statement  is 
directed  at  both  men  and  women.”  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said: 

4 #  &) 

4 And  to  remit  it  is  nearer  to  At-Tacpvd  (piety,  righteousness).) 

indicates  that  the  one  who  forgives,  is  nearer  to  At-Taqwa 
(piety).”*3’  A  similar  statement  was  made  by  Ash-Shalii  and 
several  other  scholars. 

Mujahid,  An-Nakha‘i,  Ad-Dahhak,  Muqatii  bin  Hayyan,  Ar- 

111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :840-842. 

*2*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2 :842 . 

*3*  At-Tabari  5:162. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


667 


J 


-  *  >1, 


r<\ 


-mm 

|p  See. 


>jCcjJ^  iijj  p  £~r=C~\'CSfSSfiy-i ilZ-^'j 

StWf 


^Sn  Rabl‘  bin  Anas  and 
Thawri  stated  that 
liberality’  mentioned 
in  the  Ayah  refers  to 
the  woman  giving 
away  her  half  Mahr, 
or  the  man  giving 
away  the  full  Afahr.*1* 
This  is  why  Allah  said 
here: 

4  f^S*»  J-iniM  1^*3  'ij} 

4 And  do  not  forget 
liberality  between 

yourselves.} 
meaning,  kindness  (or 
generosity),  as  Said 
has  stated.121  Allah 
said: 

iTruly,  Allah  is  All- 
Seer  of  what  you  do.} 
meaning,  none  of 
your  affairs  ever 
escapes  His  perfect 

Watch,  and  He  will  reward  each  according  to  his  deeds. 

VC)  j)i  fiy, *k  \yyj  jc. 

ijljSj  jjj  U  jv U?  ifll  bCSj 

4238.  Guard  strictly  (five  obligatory)  As-Salawdt  (the  prayers) 
especially  the  Middle  Saldh.  And  stand  before  Allah  with 
obedience.} 

4239.  And  if  you  fear  (an  enemy),  (perform  Saldh)  on  foot  or 
riding.  And  when  you  are  in  safety,  then  remember  Allah 
(pray)  in  the  manner  He  has  taught  you,  which  you  kneio  not 


tg^±4&® 

Jf  pxijUdiSc^l  jvS  iyji  4i>^4^  Jlia 

OLa-tsajo-iaf 

(jp  ”  ffi  jji> J. J>  i 


'J  “Jf; 


111  At-Tabari  5:165,166. 
,21  At-Tabari  5:166. 


668 


Tafsir  Rm  Kgthtr 


(before).} 

Allah  commands  that  the  prayer  should  be  performed 
properly  and  on  time.  It  is  reported  in  the  Two  Sahlhs  that  Ibn 
Mas’ud  said,  “I  asked  the  Prophet  jg,  Which  deed  is  the 
dearest  (to  Allah)?’  He  replied: 

«To  offer  the  prayers  at  their  fixed  times.* 

I  asked,  What  is  the  next  (in  goodness)?’  He  replied: 

«?ijl  ^ 

«To  participate  in  Jihad  (religious  fighting)  in  Allah's  cause.*” 

I  again  asked,  What  is  the  next  (in  goodness)?’  He  replied: 

•JoJljjl  > 

«To  be  good  and  dutiful  to  your  parents .» 

‘Abdullah  then  added,  “The  Prophet  sg  told  me  these  words, 
and  had  I  asked  more,  the  Prophet  sg  would  have  told  me 
more.”111 

The  Middle  Prayer 

Furthermore,  Allah  has  specifically  mentioned  the  Middle 
prayer,  which  is  the  Asr  prayer  according  to  the  majority  of 
the  scholars  among  the  Companions,  as  At-Tirmidhi  and  Al- 
Baghawi  have  stated.  Al-Qadi  Al-Mawardi  added  that  the 
majority  of  the  scholars  of  the  TabVln  also  held  this  view.  Al- 
Hafiz  Abu  ‘Umar  bin  ‘Abdul-Barr  said  that  this  is  also  the 
opinion  of  the  majority  of  the  scholars  of  the  Athar  (i.e.,  the 
Hadith  and  the  statements  of  the  Salaf).  In  addition,  Abu 
Muhammad  bin  ‘Atiyah  said  that  this  is  the  Tafsir  (of  the 
Middle  prayer)  of  the  majority  of  scholars.  Al-Hafiz  Abu 
Muhammad  ‘Abdul-Mu'min  bin  Khalaf  Ad-Dumyati  stated  in 
his  book  on  the  Middle  prayer  that  it  is  the  Asr  prayer  and 
mentioned  that  this  is  the  Tafsir  of  ‘Umar,  ‘Ali,  Ibn  Mas^d, 
Abu  Ayyub,  ‘AbduUfih  bin  ‘Amr,  Samurah  bin  Jundub,  Abu 
Hurayrah,  Abu  Said,  Hafsah,  Umm  Habibah,  Umm  Salamah, 
Ibn  ‘Abbas  and  ‘Alshah.  This  is  also  the  Tafsir  of  ‘Ubaydah, 

***  Path  Al-B&ri  2:12,  Muslim  1 :90 . 


669 


cr^u  3 :  Af-B aqarah  (225  -  252)  (Fart-JX. 


Ibrahim  An-Nakha‘I,  Razln,  Zirr  bin 

Jubayr,  Ibn  Sirin,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  Ad-Dahhak,  Al-Kal  , 
MuqatU,  TJbayd  bin  Abu  Maryam,  and  others. 

The  Proof  that  the  *Asr  Prayer  is  the  Middle  Prayer 

Imam  Ahmad 

Messenger  said  during  ui 

Confederates):  # 

«$  u^' 

,T hev  ( the  disbelievers)  busied  us  from  performing  the  Middle 
prnyer,the  'Asr  prayer ,  may  Allah  fill  their  hearts  and  houses 

with  fire .»  m 

He  performed  the  'Asr  prayer  between  Maghrib  »JW«- 
Muslim  and  An-Nasal  recorded,  this  Hadah.  in  addthon,  the 
TTwo  Shaykhs,  Abu  DAwud,  AbTirmidhi  An-Nasa.' '  and 

several  other  collectors  of  the  Sman  r«ord«l 
using  different  chains  of  narrators  to  Ah.  .  ausVi’c 

the  battle  of  Al-Alfzab,  when  the  Mushriks  prevented _  Allah  » 
Messenger  sg  and  his  Companions  from  performing  the  A 
prayer?  has  been  narrated  by  several  other  Compantons  We 
only  mentioned  the  narrations  that  stated  that  t  e 
prayer  is  the  ‘Apr  prayer.  Furthetmore,  MuaUmmeportrftmte 
wordings  for  this  Hadith  from  Ibn  Mashid  and  Al-Bara  bm 

‘Azib  ^  ,  «  . 

In  addition,  Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  Samurah  bin 

Jundub  said  that  Allah  s  Messenger  sai 

«The  Middle  prayer  is  the  Mr  prayer .»151 

In  another  narration,  Allah’s  Messenger  «  mentioned: 

1*1  Ahmad  1:113. 

l2>  Muslim  1:437,  An-Nasal  6:303. 

^  D&wud^287^  fahfat  M^hwadhi  8  ^^S^^An-NasS’!*!  :236,  /^hmad 
1:137. 

Muslim  1 :437 ,438 . 

Ahmad  5 :22 . 


670 


Tnfsir  Ibn  Kathir 


If  £  ijL.r  ^ 

-w* 

another  narration,  Allah’s  Messenge  “«  s  *d:  ?  Prayer’  '  te 

6?* 

“//  is  the  Asr  prayer. a 

and  Ibn  JaTar  mentioned  that  the  Pronh^t  a»  ,lrQ„  *u  .  . 

s£LS“j?-E2  s-*  ,At-“  ™  ^ 

*The  Middle  prayer  is  the  'Asr  prayer  »(4I 
Mt™”  'bn  “-a.  Allah’s 

C^uaxJl  S^Uj 

“ The  'Asr  prayer  is  the  Middle  prayer .» 
^“then  stated  that  this  Hadith  is  of  a  Hasan  Sahih 

rin6sM“,lra  “  the  ta  ^  wsr^ 


V**11  jyJJi  ^ 

p^r.  tevEX* b“^  U$  fr°m  M,minS  ^  Mme 

tszsr&fsz  r  *» 

*'  »hen  hTSt  it 


,1J  Ahmad  5:8. 

*2*  Aljmad  5 :7 . 

mi  TuWat  Al-Ahwadhi  8 :328 . 
Ibn  Hibban  3:121 . 

161  Tu^fat  Ai-Ahwadhi  8 :329 . 
1  Muslim  1 :437. 


I 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


671 


•  JUi  jjj  UitiCj  i'fSe  -UjU 


'i  Whoever  misses  the  'Asr  prayer  will  be  like  who  has  lost  his 
family  and  money. n*1* 


It  is  reported  in  the  Sahxh  that  Buraydah  bin  Al-Husayb  said 
that  the  Prophet  jg  said: 


“On  a  cloudy  day,  perform  the  ('Asr)  prayer  early,  for  whoever 
misses  the  'Asr  prayer,  will  have  his  (good)  deeds  annulled M2^ 


The  Prohibition  of  speaking  during  the  Prayer 

Allah  said: 

A  \y£ 


iAnd  stand  before  Allah  with  obedience. $ 

meaning,  with  humbleness  and  humility  before  Him  (i.e., 
during  the  prayer).  This  command  indicates  that  it  is  not 
allowed  to  speak  during  the  prayer,  as  speaking  contradicts 
the  nature  of  the  prayer.  This  is  why  the  Prophet  jg  refused  to 
answer  Ibn  Mas*ud  when  he  greeted  him  while  he  was  praying 
and  said  afterwards: 


J>  3]t 


“The  prayer  makes  one  sufficiently 


(i.e.,  by  the  various  actions  of  the  body,  tongue  and  heart 
involved  during  the  prayer.) 

Muslim  reported  that  the  Prophet  jjg  said  to  Mu'awiyah  bin 
Hakam  As-Sulami  when  he  spoke  during  the  prayer: 


llil 


Ujl  ^01 


«4)l  ‘J> 3J 


“ The  ordinary  speech  people  indulge  in  is  not  appropriate 
during  the  prayer.  The  prayer  involves  only  Tasbih  (praising 
Allah),  Takbtr  (saying  Allahu  Akbar,  i.e.,  Allah  is  the  Most 


Muslim  1 :436. 

121  Ibn  Majah  1 :224 . 
131  Muslim  1 :382 . 


672 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Great)  and  remembering  Allah. ^ 

Imam  Ahmad  reported  that  Zayd  bin  Arqam  said,  “One  used 
to  address  his  friend  about  various  affairs  during  the  prayer. 
Then  when  this  Ayah  was  revealed: 

ft 

iAnd  stand  before  Allah  with  obedience.) 

we  were  ordered  to  refrain  from  speaking.”*2'  The  Group*3* 
(i.e.,  the  Hadith  collections),  except  Ibn  Majah,  reported  this 
Hadith. 


The  Fear  Prayer 

Allah  said: 


•f 

>1% 


iAnd  if  you  fear  (an  enemy),  (perform  Saldh)  on  foot  or  riding. 
And  when  you  are  in  safety,  then  remember  Allah  (pray)  in  the 
manner  He  has  taught  you,  which  you  knew  not  (before).) 

After  Allah  commanded  His  servants  to  perform  the  prayer 
perfectly  and  emphasized  this  commandment.  He  mentioned 
the  situation  where  the  person  might  not  be  able  to  perform 
the  prayer  perfectly,  during  battle  and  combat.  Allah  said: 


iAnd  if  you  fear  (an  enemy),  perform  Saldh  on  foot  or  riding.) 

meaning,  pray  in  the  appropriate  manner  under  these 
circumstances,  whether  on  foot  or  riding  and  whether  facing 
the  Qiblah  or  otherwise.  Imam  Malik  reported  that  Nafi‘  related 
that  Ibn  TJmar  used  to  describe  the  Fear  prayer  when  he  was 
asked  about  it  and  would  then  add,  “If  there  is  intense  fear, 
pray  on  foot,  riding,  facing  the  Qiblah  and  otherwise."  Nafi‘ 
commented,  “I  think  that  he  related  that  to  the  Prophet  3§.”*4’ 


111  Muslim  1:381. 

■2|  Ahmad  4:368. 

*3'  Fath  Al-Bari  3:88,  Muslilm  1 :383,  Abu  Dawud  1 :583,  Tuhfat  Al- 
Ahwadhi  8 :330 ,  An-Nasal  3:18. 

*4*  Al-Muwatta’  1 :184. 


673 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) _ 

Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim  reported  the  Hadith)1^ 

Muslim,  Abu  Dawud,  An-Nasal,  ibn  Majah  and  Ibn  Jarir 
reported  that  Ibn  Abbas  said,  "Allah  has  ordained  the  prayer 
by  the  words  of  your  Prophet  jg:  four  ( Rak'ah )  while  residing, 
*wo  J2 traveling  and  one  Rak'ah  during  times  of 
fear.’  This  is  also  the  view  of  Al-Hasan  Al-Basri,  Qatadah, 
Ad-Dahhak,  and  others.*31 

In  addition,  Al-Bukhari  has  entitled  a  Chapter:  ‘Prayer  while 
confronting  the  Forts  and  facing  the  Enemy’.  Al-Awzal  said,  “If 
the  victory  seems  near  and  the  Muslims  are  unable  to  perform 
the  prayer  {in  the  normal  manner),  they  should  pray  by 
nodding  each  by  himself.  If  they  are  unable  to  nod,  they 
should  delay  the  prayer  until  fighting  is  finished.  When  they 
feel  safe,  they  should  pray  two  Rak'ah.  If  they  are  unable,  they 
should  then  pray  one  Rak'ah  that  includes  two  prostrations.  If 
they  are  unable,  then  Takbir  alone  does  not  suffice,  so  they 
should  delay  the  prayer  until  they  are  safe.”  This  is  the  same 
view  that  Makhul  held.  Anas  bin  Malik  said,  “I  participated  in 
the  attack  on  the  fort  of  Tastar,  when  the  light  of  dawn  started 
to  become  clear.  Suddenly,  the  fighting  raged  and  the  Muslims 
were  unable  to  pray  until  the  light  of  day  spread.  We  then 
prayed  (the  Dawn  prayer)  with  Abu  Mtisa  and  we  became 
victorious.  I  would  not  have  been  pleased  if  I  were  to  gain  in 
the  life  of  this  world  and  whatever  is  in  it  instead  of  that 
prayer.”*41  This  is  the  wording  of  Al-Bukhari. 

Prayer  during  the  Times  of  Peace  is  performed  normally 

Allah  said: 

iAnd  when  you  are  in  safety,  then  remember  Allah  (pray)} 

meaning,  ‘Perform  the  prayer  as  I  have  commanded  you  by 
completing  its  bowing,  prostration,  standing,  sitting,  and  with 
the  required  attention  (in  the  heart)  and  supplication.’  Allah 
said: 

***  Fatfi  Al-Bari  8 :46 ,  Muslim  1 :574 . 

121  Muslim  1 :478 ,479 ,  Abu  Dawud  2:40,  An-NasM  3:169,  Ibn  Majah 
1 :339 ,  At-Tabari  5 :  247 . 

*3*  At-Tabari  5 :240,241 . 

,4*  Fath  Al-Bari  2:503. 


674 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathfr 


46. \jp  $  a  i3> 


iin  the  manner  He  has  taught  you,  which  you  knew  not 
(before).} 


meaning,  just  as  He  has  endowed  you,  guided  you  and  taught 
you  about  what  benefits  you  in  this  life  and  the  Hereafter,  so 
thank  and  remember  Him.  Similarly,  Allah  said  after  He 
mentioned  the  prayer  of  Fear, 


£  z*  Si  ij&l  (4} 


4... but  when  you  are  free  from  danger,  perform  As-Salah. 
Verily,  As-Salah  (the  prayer)  is  enjoined  on  the  believers  at 
fixed  hours.}  (4:103) 

We  will  mention  the  Hadiths  about  the  prayer  of  Fear  and  its 
description  in  Surat  An-Nisa’  while  mentioning  Allah’s 
statement: 

}When  you  (O  Messenger  Muliammad  sg)  are  among  than, 
and  lead  than  in  As-Salah  (the  prayer).}  (4:102) 


gjj-H  jj.  Ji  *i-fj  VJd'  u&jf 

^  lifj  ^  a  6m  u  a  yi  4 

i  ft  5^2  j&jfr 


}240.  And  those  of  you  who  die  and  leave  behind  wives  should 
bequeath  for  their  wives  a  year's  maintenance  (and  residence) 
without  turning  than  out,  but  if  they  (wives)  leave,  there  is  no 
sin  on  you  for  that  which  they  do  of  themselves,  provided  it  is 
honorable  (e.g.,  lawful  marriage).  And  Allah  is  All-Mighty, 
All-Wise.} 

4241.  And  for  divorced  women,  maintenance  (should  be 
provided)  on  reasonable  (scale).  This  is  a  duty  on  Al-Muttaqin 
(the  pious).} 

4242 .  Thus  Allah  makes  clear  His  Aydt  (Laws)  to  you,  in  order 
that  you  may  understand.} 


Surah  2.  Al-Bjujargh  (225  -  252 )  (Part-?) _ 675 

Ayah  (2:240)  was  abrogated 

The  majority  of  the  scholars  said  that  this  Ayah  (2:240)  was 
abrogated  by  the  Ayah  (2:234),  what  Allah  said: 

yr*^  Mu'  o— ^ 

4... they  (the  wives)  shall  wait  (as  regards  their  marriage)  far 
faur  months  and  ten  days.)  (2:234) 

For  instance,  Al-Bukhari  reported  that  Ibn  Az-Zubayr  said:  I 
said  to  TJthman  bin  ‘AfFan: 


4  And  those  of  you  who  die  and  leave  wives  behind  them) 

was  abrogated  by  the  other  Ayah  (2:234).  Therefore,  why  did 
you  collect  it  (meaning,  in  the  Qur'an)?”  He  said,  “O  my 

nephew!  I  shall  not  change  any  part  of  the  Qur’an  from  its 
place.”1'1 

The  question  that  Ibn  Az-Zubayr  asked  TJthman  means:  If 
the  ruling  of  the  Ayah  (2:240)  was  abrogated  to  four  months 
(the  'Iddah  of  the  widow,  and  refer  to  2:234),  then  what  is  the 
wisdom  behind  including  it  in  the  Qur’an,  although  its  ruling 
has  been  abrogated?  If  the  Ayah  (2:240)  remains  (in  the 
Qur’an)  after  the  Ayah  that  abrogated  it  (2:234),  this  might 
imply  that  its  ruling  is  still  valid.’  TJthman,  the  Leader  of  the 
faithful,  answered  him  by  stating  that  this  is  a  matter  of  the 
revelation,  which  mentioned  these  Ayat  in  this  order. 
Therefore,  I  shall  leave  the  Ayah  where  I  found  it  in  the 
Qur’an.’ 

Ibn  Abu  Hatim  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  about  what 
Allah  said: 


Jjijf 


"’v  /  '"t  x  >  <''/  > 


$And  those  of  you  zvlto  die  and  leave  behind  wives  should 
bequeath  for  their  wives  a  years  maintenance  (and  residence) 
without  turning  them  out,$ 

“The  widow  used  to  reside,  and  have  her  provisions  provided 

m 


Fath  A l- Bari  8  :48 . 


676 


Tigfefr  Ibn  Kathfr 


for  her  for  a  year,  in  her  deceased  husband’s  house.  Later,  the 
Ayah  that  specified  the  inheritance  (4:12)  abrogated  this  Ayah 
(2:240),  and  thus  the  widow  inherits  one-fourth  or  one-eighth 
of  what  her  (deceased)  husband  leaves  behind.”1 11 

Ibn  Abu  Hatim  also  related  that  ‘Ali  bin  Abu  Talhah  stated 
that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “When  a  man  died  and  left  behind  a 
widow,  she  used  to  remain  in  his  house  for  a  year  for  her 
‘Iddah,  all  the  while  receiving  her  provisions  during  this  time. 
Thereafter,  Allah  revealed  this  Ayah: 


4And  those  of  you  who  die  and  leave  wives  behind  them,  they 
(the  wives)  shall  wait  (as  regards  their  marriage)  for  four 
months  and  ten  days >  (2:234) 


So,  this  is  the  ‘ Iddah  of  the  widow,  unless  she  was  pregnant, 
for  her  ‘Iddah  then  ends  when  she  gives  birth.  Allah  also  said: 


%  p-a  4  $j;  -jZ'j  ii* 

it- 


iln  that  which  you  leave,  their  (your  wives')  share  is  a  fourth  if 
you  leave  no  child;  but  if  you  leave  a  child,  they  get  an  eighth 
of  that  which  you  leave. $  (4:12) 

So  Allah  specified  the  share  of  the  widow  in  the  inheritance 
and  there  was  no  need  for  the  will  or  the  Nafaqah 
(maintenance)  which  were  mentioned  in  (2:240). ”|21 

Ibn  Abu  Hatim  stated  that  Mujahid,  Al-Hasan,  ‘Ikrimah, 
Qatadah,  Ad-Dahhak,  Ar-RabT  and  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  said 
that  the  Ayah  (2:240)  was  abrogated  by: 

ifour  months  and  ten  days.}  (2:234),3) 

Al-Bukh&ri  reported  that  Mujahid  said  that: 


p*  '4* 


4And  those  of  you  who  die  and  leave  wives  behind  them } 
(2:234) 

[11  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2:871. 

121  At-Jabari  5:255. 

I3*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  2:875,876. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


677 


used  to  be  the  ‘Iddah,  and  the  widow  had  to  remain  with  her 
(deceased)  husband’s  family  (during  that  period,  i.e.,  four 
months  and  ten  days).  Then,  Allah  revealed: 


s£-4  -£*■  ia 

02  4  ^  d>  U  ^  j,  o)» 


4 And  those  of  you  who  die  and  leave  behind  wives  should 
bequeath  for  their  wives  a  year's  maintenance  (and  residence) 
without  turning  them  out,  but  if  they  (wives)  leave,  there  is  no 
sin  on  you  for  that  which  they  do  of  themselves,  provided  it  is 
honorable  (e.g.,  lawful  marriage). $ 

So,  Allah  made  the  rest  of  the  year,  which  is  seven  months 
and  twenty  days,  as  a  will  and  testament  for  her. 
Consequently,  if  she  wants,  she  could  use  her  right  in  this  will 
and  remain  in  the  residence  (for  the  rest  of  the  year).  Or,  if 
she  wants,  she  could  leave  the  (deceased  husband’s)  house 
after  the  four  months  and  ten  days  have  passed.  This  is  the 
meaning  of  what  Allah  said: 


4  ■  •  -without  turning  them  out,  but  if  they  (wives)  leave,  there  is 
no  sin  on  you.} 

Therefore,  the  required  term  of  ‘Iddah  is  still  unchanged 
(refer  to  2:234). 

‘Ata’  quoted  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  “This  Ayah  (2:240)  has  abrogated 
(the  requirement  that)  the  widow  spends  the  ‘Iddah  with  his 
(i.e.,  her  deceased  husband’s)  family.  So,  she  spends  her 
‘Iddah  wherever  she  wants.  This  is  the  meaning  of  what  Allah 
said: 


^5^4  o^} 

4 without  turning  them  out,}.” 

Ala’  also  said:  “If  she  wants,  she  spends  the  * Iddah  with  his 
family  and  resides  there  according  to  the  will  (meaning  the 
rest  of  the  year).  If  she  wants,  she  is  allowed  to  leave,  for  Allah 
said: 


4i 12  Q  £&  •%} 

4there  is  no  sin  on  you  for  that  which  they  do  of  themselves,}.” 


678 


Tafsir  Ibti  Kathxr 

*Ata’  then  said:  “Then  (the  Ayah  on)  the  inheritance  (refer  to 
4:12)  came  and  abrogated  the  residence.  Hence,  the  widow 
spends  her  ‘Iddah  wherever  she  wants  and  does  not  have  the 
right  to  residence  any  more.”111 

The  statement  of  ‘Ata’  and  those  who  held  the  view  that  the 
Ayah  (2:240)  was  abrogated  by  the  Ayah  on  the  inheritance 
(4:12),  is  only  valid  for  more  than  the  four  months  and  ten 
days  (required  in  2:234).  However,  if  they  mean  that  the  four 
months  and  ten  days  are  not  required  from  the  deceased 
husband’s  estate,  then  this  opinion  is  the  subject  of 
disagreement  among  the  scholars.  As  proof,  they  said  that  the 
widow  is  required  to  remain  in  her  (deceased)  husband’s  house 
(for  four  months  and  ten  days)  according  to  what  Malik 
reported  from  Zaynab  bint  Kah  bin  TJjrah.  She  said  that 
Farfah  bint  Malik  bin  Sinan,  the  sister  of  Abu  Said  Al-Khudri, 
told  her  that  she  came  to  Allah’s  Messenger  asking  him  to 
return  to  her  family’s  residence  with  Banu  Khudrah.  Her 
husband  had  pursued  some  of  his  servants  who  ran  away,  but 
when  he  reached  the  area  of  Al-Qadum,  they  killed  him.  She 
said,  “So  I  asked  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  if  I  should  stay  with  my 
family  in  Banu  Khudrah,  for  my  (deceased)  husband  did  not 
leave  me  a  residence  that  he  owns  or  Nafaqah  (maintenance). 
Allah’s  Messenger  answered  in  the  positive.  While  I  was  in 
the  room,  Allah’s  Messenger  summoned  me  or  had  someone 
summon  me  and  said:  „ 

*What  did  you  say?* 

I  repeated  the  story  to  him  about  my  (deceased)  husband.  He 
said: 

“Stay  at  your  home  until  the  term  reaches  its  end,* 

So  I  remained  through  the  'Iddah  term  for  four  months  and 
ten  days  in  my  (deceased  husband’s)  house.  Thereafter, 
TJthman  bin  ‘Aflan  sent  for  me  during  his  reign  and  asked  me 
about  this  matter  and  I  told  him  what  happened.  He  made  a 
judgment  to  the  same  effect.”121  This  Hadlth  was  also  collected 


111  Al-Bukhari  4531,5344. 
121  Al-Muwatta'  2:591. 


679 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 

by  Abu  Dawud,  At-Tirmidhi,  An-Nasal  and  Ibn  Majah.(l*  At- 
Tirmidhi  said,  "Hasan  Sahih''. 


The  Necessity  of  the  Mut‘ah  (Gift)  at  the  Time  of  Divorce 

Allah  said: 


iAnd  Jbr  divorced  women,  maintenance  (should  be  provided)  on 
reasonable  (scale).  This  is  a  duty  on  Al-Muttaqin  (the  pious).} 

‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  Zayd  bin  Aslam  said  that  when  Allah’s 
statement: 


icn&Zi'  £  tsi  ££} 


i...a  gift  of  reasonable  amount  is  a  duty  on  the  doers  of  good } 
(2:236) 


was  revealed,  a  man  said,  “If  I  want,  I  will  be  excellent  and  if  I 
do  not,  I  will  not.”  Thereafter,  Allah  revealed  this  Ayah: 


4 And  Jbr  divorced  women,  maintenance  (should  be  provided)  on 
reasonable  (scale).  This  is  a  duty  on  Al-Muttaqin  (the 
pious). 


The  scholars  who  ruled  that  the  Mut‘ah  (reasonable  gift)  at 
the  time  of  divorce  is  required  for  every  divorced  woman, 
whether  she  had  a  bridal-money  appointed  for  her  or  not,  and 
whether  the  marriage  was  consummated  or  not,  relied  on  this 
Ayah  (2:241)  when  they  issued  their  ruling.  This  is  the  view 
taken  on  this  subject  by  Said  bin  Jubayr  and  several  others 
among  the  Sala?3'  and  also  Ibn  Jarir.  Hence,  Allah’s 
statement: 


■— 1  (Jdt  Jtj  ,jM 


iThere  is  no  sin  on  you,  if  you  divorce  women  while  yet  you 
have  not  touched  (had  sexual  relation  with)  them,  nor  appointed 

111  Abu  Dawud  2:773,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  4:319,390,  An-Nasal 
6:200,  Ibn  Majah  1  :654. 

121  At-Tabari  5:264. 

131  At-Tabari  5:263. 


681 


Surah  2.  Al-Baaarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


a  village  several  miles  away  from  Wasit  (in  Iraq). 

In  his  Tafsir,  Waki‘  bin  Jarrah  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
commented. 


iDid  you  (O  Muhammad  j&)  not  think  of  those  who  went  forth 
from  their  homes  in  thousands,  fearing  death?} 

that  they  were  four  thousand  persons  who  escaped  the  plague 
(that  broke  out  in  their  land).  They  said,  “We  should  go  to  a 
land  that  is  free  of  death!”  When  they  reached  a  certain  area, 
Allah  said  to  them: 


i'Vie."} 

and  they  all  died.  Afterwards,  one  of  the  Prophets  passed  by 
them  and  supplicated  to  Allah  to  resurrect  them  and  Allah 
brought  them  back  to  life.  So,  Allah  stated: 

Oi  L/J&  j) 

iDid  you  (O  Muhammad  3^5)  not  think  of  those  who  went  forth 
from  their  homes  in  the  thousands,  fearing  death?} 

Furthermore,  several  scholars  among  the  Salaf  said  that 
these  people  were  the  residents  of  a  city  during  the  time  of  the 
Children  of  Israel.  The  weather  in  their  land  did  not  suit  them 
and  an  epidemic  broke  out.  They  fled  their  land  fearing  death 
and  took  refuge  in  the  wilderness.  They  later  arrived  at  a 
fertile  valley  and  they  filled  what  is  between  its  two  sides. 
Then  Allah  sent  two  angels  to  them,  one  from  the  lower  side 
and  the  other  from  the  upper  side  of  the  valley.  The  angels 
screamed  once  and  all  the  people  died  instantly,  just  as  the 
death  of  one  man.  They  were  later  moved  to  a  different  place, 
where  walls  and  graves  were  built  around  them.  They  all 
perished,  and  their  bodies  rotted  and  disintegrated.  Long 
afterwards,  one  of  the  Prophets  of  the  Children  of  Israel, 
whose  name  was  Hizqll  (Ezekiel),  passed  by  them  and  asked 
Allah  to  bring  them  back  to  life  by  his  hand.  Allah  accepted 
his  supplication  and  commanded  him  to  say,  “O  rotted  bones, 
Allah  commands  you  to  come  together.”  The  bones  of  every 
body  were  brought  together.  Allah  then  commanded  him  to 


682 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathir 

say,  “O  bones,  Allah  commands  you  to  be  covered  with  flesh, 
nerves  and  skin.”  That  also  happened  while  I^izqil  was 
watching.  Allah  then  commanded  him  to  say,  “O  souls,  Allah 
commands  you  to  return,  each  to  the  body  that  it  used  to 
inhabit.”  They  all  came  back  to  life,  looked  around  and 
proclaimed,  “All  praise  is  due  to  You  (O  Allah!)  and  there  is  no 
deity  worthy  of  worship  except  You.”  Allah  brought  them  back 
to  life  after  they  had  perished  long  ago. 

We  should  state  that  bringing  these  people  back  to  life  is  a 
clear  proof  that  physical  resurrection  shall  occur  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection.  This  is  why  Allah  said: 

iTruly,  Allah  is  full  of  bounty  to  mankind 

meaning,  in  that  He  shows  them  His  great  signs,  sound  proofs 
and  clear  evidences.  Yet, 

Y  *13  XU 


ibut  most  men  thank  not.}111 


as  they  do  not  thank  Allah  for  what  He  has  given  them  with  in 
their  worldly  life  and  religious  affairs. 

The  story  of  the  dead  people  (2:244  above)  also  indicates  that 
no  caution  can  ever  avert  destiny  and  that  there  is  no  refuge 
from  Allah,  but  to  Allah  Himself.  These  people  departed  from 
their  land  fleeing  the  epidemic  and  seeking  to  enjoy  a  long  life. 
What  they  earned  was  the  opposite  of  what  they  sought,  as 
death  came  quickly  and  instantaneously  and  seized  them  all. 

There  is  an  authentic  Hadith  that  Imam  Ahmad  reported 
that  ‘Abdullah  bin  ‘Abbas  said  that  ‘Umar  bin  Al-Khattab  once 
went  to  Ash-Sham  (Syria).  When  he  reached  the  area  of  Sargh, 
he  was  met  by  the  commanders  of  the  army:  Abu  TJbaydah 
bin  Jarrah  and  his  companions.  They  told  him  that  the  plague 
had  broken  out  in  Ash-Sham.  The  Hadith  then  mentioned  that 
‘Abdur-Rahman  bin  ‘Awf,  who  was  away  attending  to  some  of 
his  affairs,  came  and  said,  “I  have  knowledge  regarding  this 
matter.  I  heard  Allah’s  Messenger  say: 


ills 


At-Tabari  5 :266 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


m 


•dj. 

“ I f  it  (the  plague)  breaks  out  iti  a  land  that  you  are  in,  do  not 
leave  that  land  to  escape  from  it.  If  you  hear  about  it  in  a  land, 
do  not  enter  it.* 

“Umar  then  thanked  Allah  and  went  back.*11  This  Hadith  is 
also  reported  in  the  Sahihayn  J21 


Abandoning  Jihad  does  not  alter  Destiny 

Allah  said: 


JLJc  ^5*  si'  it  4  IJfciSj  ^ 


iAnd  fight  in  the  way  of  Allah  and  know  that  Allah  is  All- 
Hearer,  All-Kttower.} 


This  Ayah  indicates  that  just  as  caution  does  not  alter 
destiny,  abandoning  Jihad  will  neither  bring  the  appointed 
term  closer  nor  delay  it.  Rather,  destiny  and  the  appointed 
provisions  are  fixed  and  shall  never  be  changed  or  altered, 
neither  by  addition  nor  deletion.  Similarly,  Allah  said: 


o',  f.  ji  bti  U  lijc-Uol  jl  i*t*^*"^  'jMS  4^'^ 


4 (They  are)  the  ones  who  said  about  their  killed  brethren  while 
they  thetnselves  sat  (at  home) :  "If  only  they  had  listened  to  us, 
they  would  not  have  been  killed."  Say:  "Avert  death  from  your 
own  selves,  if  you  speak  the  truth."}  (3:168) 

Allah  said: 


ji  Gli(  &  up  s?  se$  &  2  e; 

iizzs  i 6  pp.  tfjs  m  %  &  £  % 


4They  say:  " Our  Lord!  Why  have  you  ordained  for  us 
fighting?  Would  that  you  had  granted  us  respite  for  a  short 
period ?"  Say:  "Short  is  the  enjoyment  of  this  world.  The 
Hereafter  is  (far)  better  for  him  who  fears  Allah,  and  you  shall 
not  be  dealt  with  unjustly  even  equal  to  the  Fatila  (a  scalish 


m  Ahmad  1 :194. 

121  FathAl-Bari  10:189,190,  12 :361 ,  Muslim  4  : 1740. 


684 


Tafsfr  Ibti  Kathir 

thread  in  the  long  slit  of  a  date  stone).  Wheresoever  you  may 
be,  death  will  overtake  you  even  if  you  are  in  fortresses  built  up 
strong  and  high!")  (4:77,  78) 

Abu  Sulayman,  Khalid  bin  Al-Walid,  the  commander  of  the 
Muslim  armies,  the  veteran  among  Muslim  soldiers,  the 
protector  of  Islam  and  the  Sword  of  Allah  that  was  raised 
above  His  enemies,  said  while  dying,  “I  have  participated  in  so- 
and-so  number  of  battles.  There  is  not  a  part  of  my  body,  but 
suffered  a  shot  (of  an  arrow),  a  stab  (of  a  spear)  or  a  strike  (of 
a  sword).  Yet,  here  I  am,  I  die  on  my  bed  just  as  the  camel 
dies!  May  the  eyes  of  the  cowards  never  taste  sleep.”  He,  may 
Allah  be  pleased  with  him,  was  sorry  and  in  pain  because  he 
did  not  die  as  martyr  in  battle.  He  was  sad  that  he  had  to  die 
on  his  bed!^1 


The  Good  Loan  and  its  Reward 


Allah  said: 


4  pJ 


3  \j*Jh  b  &) 


4Who  is  he  that  will  lend  to  Allah  a  goodly  loan  so  that  He 
may  multiply  it  to  him  many  times?) 

In  this  Ayah ,  Allah  encourages  His  servants  to  spend  in  His 
cause.  Allah  mentioned  this  same  Ayah  in  several  other  parts 
of  His  Glorious  Qur’an.  The  Hadith  that  mentions  that  Allah 
descends  (eveiy  night  down  on  the  nearest  heaven  to  us  when 
the  last  third  of  the  night  remains)  states  that  Allah  says: 

>,  ,  ,  , 

•f  V}  ‘J** 

*Who  would  give  a  loan  to  He  Who  is  neither  poor  nor 
unjust J>|2i 

Allah’s  statement: 

4  /i  jU Ml2j  ^ 


4He  may  multiply  it  to  him  many  times),  is  similar  to  His 
statement: 


^  Tahdhib  At-Tahdhib  3  : 124 . 

^  Muslim  758,  MusnadAbu  *Awdnah  1 :145. 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baaarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2 


685 


X  ^  Ally 

47?ie  likeness  of  those 
who  spend  their  wealth 
in  the  way  of  Allah,  is 
as  the  likeness  of  a  grain 
(of  com) ;  it  grows  seven 
ears,  and  each  ear  has  a 
hundred  grains.  Allah 
gives  manifold  increase 
to  whom  He  wills. > 
(2:261) 

We  will  mention 
this  Ayah  later  on. 
Allah  then  said: 

Jafi  i 

iAnd  it  is  Allah  that 
decreases  or  increases 
(your  provisions)  ,$ 
meaning,  ‘Spend  (in 
Allah’s  cause)  and  do 
not  be  anxious.’ 
Certainly,  Allah  is  the 
Sustainer  Who 
increases  or  decreases 
the  provisions  to  whomever  He  wills  among  His  servants.  Allah’s 
wisdom  is  perfect,  and, 


JL_3j 

P  J  1  p  Ui$  ll-jLpj  lp^>  J 

3iij  $  SLi  >7  I 

i $ P ^ 
Sgfi  ip 

^==lPjG  z  a^=JLa  j  L-*J 

y  tA  S'  S  S'  rn  A  /  „  -^y  J  1  I  yf  .  # 

L*~*  j  ™  j J  erf  4  * 

0 


iand  unto  Him  you  shall  return.}  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection. 
^==4*  G  iy  ^3  yij  ji  jJ*  S?  Ji 

^  jcat  4^-  oi  js  jGi  p  ^  4 

p  \  -)£'  G®  j  lijjjj  jJj  <Iii  (.s  G  u_) 

4^  £*}0i  3*6  tlip  ^Li  ijJj; 


4246.  H/u>e  you  not  thought  about  the  group  of  the  Children  of 
Israel  after  (the  time  of)  Musa?  When  they  said  to  a  Prophet  of 


686 


Tafsir  Ibti  Kathir 

theirs,  ” Appoint  for  us  a  king  and  we  will  fight  in  AllaJTs 
way.”  He  said,  "Would  you  then  refrain  from  fighting,  if 
fighting  was  prescribed  for  you?”  They  said,  " Winy  should  we 
not  fight  in  Allah's  way  while  we  have  been  driven  out  of  our 
homes  and  our  children  (families  have  been  taktm  as  captives)?” 
But  when  fighting  was  ordered  for  them,  they  turned  away,  all 
except  a  few  of  them.  And  Allah  is  All-Aioare  of  the 
wrongdoers.} 

The  Story  of  the  Jews  Who  sought  a  King  to  be 
appointed  over  Them 

Mujahid  said  that  the  Prophet  (mentioned  in  the  Ayah  2:246 
above)  is  Shamwil  (Samuel). 111  Wahb  bin  Munabbih  said:  The 
Children  of  Israel  remained  on  the  straight  path  for  a  period  of 
time  after  Moses.  They  then  innovated  in  the  religion  and 
some  of  them  even  worshipped  the  idols.  Yet,  there  were 
always  Prophets  sent  among  them  who  would  command  them 
to  work  righteous  deeds,  refrain  from  doing  evil  and  who 
would  rule  them  according  to  the  commands  of  the  Torah. 
When  they  (Israelites)  committed  the  evil  that  they  committed, 
Allah  caused  their  enemies  to  overwhelm  them,  and  many 
fatalities  fell  among  them  as  a  consequence.  Their  enemies 
also  captured  a  great  number  of  them,  and  took  over  large 
areas  of  their  land.  Earlier,  anyone  who  would  fight  the 
Israelites  would  lose,  because  they  had  the  Torah  and  the 
Tabut^  which  they  inherited  generation  after  generation  ever 
since  the  time  of  Moses,  who  spoke  to  Allah  directly.  Yet,  the 
Israelites  kept  indulging  in  misguidance  until  some  king  took 
the  Tabut  from  them  during  a  battle.  That  king  also  took 
possession  of  the  Torah,  and  only  a  few  of  the  Israelites  who 
memorized  it  remained.  The  prophethood  halted  among  their 
various  tribes  and  only  a  pregnant  woman  remained  of  the 
offspring  of  Lavi  (Levi),  in  whom  the  prophethood  still 
appeared.  Her  husband  had  been  killed,  so  the  Israelites  kept 
her  in  a  house  so  that  Allah  may  give  her  a  boy,  who  would  be 
their  Prophet.  The  woman  also  kept  invoking  Allah  to  grant 
her  a  boy.  Allah  heard  her  pleas  and  gave  her  a  boy  whom  she 

1,1  At-Tabari  5:293. 

I2)  •The  aj-k  Qf  the  Covenant .  ” 


687 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 


called  ‘Shamwil’  meaning  ‘Allah  has  heard  my  pleas.’  Some 
people  said  that  the  boy’s  name  was  Sham*un  (Simeon),  which 
also  has  a  similar  meaning. 

As  that  boy  grew,  Allah  raised  him  to  be  a  righteous  person. 
When  he  reached  the  age  of  prophethood,  Allah  revealed  to 
him  and  commanded  him  to  call  (his  people)  to  Him  and  to 
His  Tawhid  (Oneness).  Shamwil  called  the  Children  of  Israel 
(to  Allah)  and  they  asked  him  to  appoint  a  king  over  them  so 
that  they  could  fight  their  enemies  under  his  command.  The 
kingship  had  also  ended  among  them.  Their  Prophet  said  to 
them,  “What  if  Allah  appoints  a  king  over  you,  would  you 
fulfill  your  vow  to  fight  under  his  command?” 


iThcy  said,  "Why  should  we  not  fight  in  Allah's  way  while  we 
have  been  driveti  out  of  our  homes  and  our  children?"} 

meaning,  ‘After  our  land  had  been  confiscated  and  our 
children  had  been  taken  from  us?’  Allah  said: 


iBut  whett  fighting  was  ordered  far  them,  they  turned  away, 
all  except  a  few  of  them.  And  Allah  is  All-Aware  of  the 
wrongdoers} 

meaning,  only  a  few  of  them  kept  their  promise,  but  the 
majority  abandoned  Jihad  and  Allah  has  full  knowledge  of 
them. 


ojiiji  4  ijlLi  il.  — I — JL»  3^j} 

|V^==C1*  ijjk, iit  0^  4  4D'i  Sf ri  44  ^4  cfaj  iCjft 


^  (JjJ  j  JL.  U-i 

^ '  Hv  '  jLJL^ 


<247.  And  their  Prophet  said  to  them,  "Indeed  Allah  has 
appointed  Tdliit  (Saul)  as  a  king  over  you.”  They  said,  "How 
can  he  be  a  king  over  14s  when  we  are  fitter  than  him  for  the 
kingdom,  and  he  has  not  been  given  enough  wealth."  He  said: 
" Verily ,  Allah  has  chosen  him  above  you  and  has  increased  him 
abundantly  in  knowledge  and  stature.  And  Allalt  grants  His 
kingdom  to  whom  He  wills.  And  Allah  is  All-Sufficient  for  His 


688 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


creatures'  needs,  All-Knower .”) 

When  the  Israelites  asked  their  Prophet  to  appoint  a  king 
over  them,  he  appointed  Talut  (Saul),  who  was  then  a  soldier. 
But,  Talut  was  not  a  descendant  of  the  house  of  kings  among 
them,  which  was  exclusively  in  the  offspring  of  Yahudha 
(Judah).  This  is  why  they  said: 

JiUf  Jj 


iHow  can  he  be  a  king  over  us)  meaning,  how  can  he  be  the  king 
for  us, 


iwhen  we  are  fitter  than  him  for  the  kingdom,  and  he  has  not  been 
given  enough  wealth?)  They  said  that  Talut  was  also  poor  and 
did  not  have  the  wealth  that  justifies  him  being  king.  Some 
people  stated  that  Talut  used  to  bring  water  to  the  people, 
while  others  stated  that  his  profession  was  dyeing  skins.  The 
Jews,  thus,  disputed  with  their  Prophet  while  they  were 
supposed  to  obey  him  and  to  say  good  words  to  him. 

Their  Prophet  answered  them: 


4  Verily ,  Allah  has  chosen  him  above  you) 

meaning,  ‘Allah  chose  Talut  from  amongst  you  while  having 
better  knowledge  about  him.’  Their  Prophet  stated,  “I  did  not 
choose  Talut  to  be  your  king  on  my  own.  Rather,  Allah  has 
commanded  that  upon  your  request.”  Further: 


i...and  has  increased  hint  abundantly  in  knowledge  and 
stature.) 

meaning,  Talut  is  more  knowledgeable  and  honorable  than 
you,  and  stronger  and  more  patient  during  combat,  and  has 
more  knowledge  of  warfare.  In  short,  he  has  more  knowledge 
and  is  stronger  than  you  are.  The  king  should  have  sufficient 
knowledge,  be  fair  looking  and  should  have  a  strong  soul  and 
body.’  He  then  said: 

$j) 

iAnd  Allah  grants  His  kingdom  to  whom  He  wills.) 


m 


Surah  2.  Al-Bagarah  (225  -  252)  (Part-2) 

meaning,  Allah  Alone  is  the  Supreme  Authority  Who  does  what 
He  wills  and  no  one  can  ask  Him  about  His  actions,  while 
they  will  be  asked  (about  their  actions  by  Him).  This  is 
because  Allah  has  perfect  knowledge,  wisdom  and  kindness 
with  His  creation.  Allah  said: 


4Ami  Allah  is  All-Sufficient  for  His  creatures'  needs,  All- 
Knower.} 


meaning,  His  favor  is  encompassing  and  He  grants  His  mercy 
to  whom  He  wills.  He  also  knows  those  who  deserve  to  be 
kings  and  those  who  do  not  deserve  it. 


/.rGi,  >.  •>  >  V 


J'l  U-4 


4248.  And  their  Prophet  said  to  them :  "Verily!  The  sign  of  His 
kingdom  is  that  there  shall  come  to  you  At-Tdbiit,  wherein  is 
Sakinah  (peace  and  reassurance)  from  your  Lord  and  a  remnant 
of  that  which  Musa  (Moses)  and  Harun  (Aaron)  left  behind, 
carried  by  the  angels.  Verily,  in  this  is  a  sign  for  you  if  you  are 
indeed  believers. $ 


Their  Prophet  then  proclaimed,  “The  sign  of  the  blessings  of 
Talut’s  kingship  over  you  is  that  Allah  will  give  you  back  the 
Tabut  (wooden  box)  that  has  been  taken  from  you.”  Allah  said: 


iwhereiti  is  Sakinah  from  your  Lord} 

meaning,  peace  (or  grace)  and  reassurance.  ‘Abdur-Razzaq 
stated  that  Qatadah  said: 


iwherein  is  Sakinah } 

means  grace.*1*  In  addition,  Ar-Rabl‘  said  that  Sakinah  means 
mercy.  This  is  also  the  meaning  given  by  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  as  Al- 
‘Awfi  narrated. 

***  ‘Abdur-Razzaq  1:98. 


690 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kafhir 


Allah  then  said: 


{...and  a  remnant  of  that  which  Musa  (Moses)  and  Hdrun 
(Aaron)  left  behind 


Ibn  Jarir  related  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  about  this  Ayah: 


4^ 


*-5 


4..  and  a  remnant  of  that  which  Musa  (Moses)  and  Hdrun 
(Aaron)  left  behind 

Meaning,  Moses’  staff  and  the  remnants  of  the  Tablets.11*  This 
is  the  same  Tafsir  of  Qatadah,  As-Suddi,  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas 
and  ‘Ikrimah,  who  added,  “And  also  the  Torah.”121  ‘Abdur- 
Razzaq  said  that  he  asked  Ath-Thawri  about  the  meaning  of, 

J'*j  „  '  g-  v*  Aj—> 


4... and  a  remnant  of  that  which  Miisd  (Moses)  and  Hdrun 
(Aaron)  left  behind 

Ath-Thawri  said,  “Some  said  that  it  contained  a  pot  of 
manna  and  the  remnants  of  the  Tablets,  while  some  others 
said  that  it  contained  (Moses1)  staff  and  two  shoes  (and  refer  to 
20:1 2). ”)31 
Allah  then  said: 

4&&& 


4 . .  .carried  by  the  an  gels. $ 

Ibn  Jurayj  stated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “The  angels  came 
down  while  carrying  the  Tabut  between  the  sky  and  the  earth, 
until  they  placed  it  before  Talut  while  the  people  were 
watching.”  As-Suddi  said,  “The  Tabut  was  brought  to  Talut ’s 
house,  so  the  people  believed  in  the  prophethood  of  Sham*un 
(Simeon)  and  obeyed  Talut”141 
The  Prophet  then  said: 

4^=S  djfl  j 

111  At-Tabari  5:331. 

121  At-Tabari  5:331,332. 

131  At-Tabari  5 :333 . 

141  At-Tabari  5:335. 


691 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (ZZii  -  252)  (Part-2) 

rJi  \ma 


ms» 


K 


4  Verily,  in  this  is  a 
sign  for  you  ^ 

testifying  to  my  truth 
in  what  I  was  sent 
with,  my 

prophethood,  and  my 
command  to  you  to 
obey  Talvit, 

oi  > 

4  if  you  are  indeed 
believers.}  in  Allah 
and  the  Hereafter.” 

*3  ^ 

$  4S 

ioji  iliLu 

Ml  *  T  I  > 

*1 

Si  &£  u£  J4S  *. i 
V  ijSd  i£i; 

*»ij «— *-j  >i>j5u«  iij  ijiL 

jjI  ijC£=>  Owlt  ^ p>.^=a  4ill  »U  ^  J\j 

4J§3  4s^  c 


oJ4Jt  i, ,J££2£E 

[>3  Lj  <io  li  p  $:« 

A  ^  ^ \'**t  .  .*1  ft'  •  i- 

c/j\ 1  ^  4il  *UJ  l  j  ^  u  ft jrvt.^  r=»  4  *19 .-.  _lA 

^  >  1  .--jf j  r< 

(jfp  '  ^v^-1  clllj  «  J>>iJ  \jCj\'\c.  UajlL 


^249.  Then  when  Tdlut  set  out  with  the  army,  he  said: 
" Verily ,  Allah  ivill  try  you  by  a  river.  So  whoever  drinks 
thereof,  he  is  not  of  me;  and  ivhoever  tastes  it  not,  he  is  of  me, 
except  him  who  takes  (thereof)  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand.”  Yet, 
they  drank  thereof,  all,  except  a  feio  of  them.  So  zvhen  he  had 
crossed  it  (the  river),  he  and  those  who  believed  with  him,  they 
said:  "VJc  have  no  power  this  day  against  )dliit  (Goliath)  and 
his  hosts.”  But  those  who  kneiv  with  certainty  that  they  were 
going  to  meet  Allah,  said:  "How  often  has  a  small  group 
overcome  a  mighty  host  by  Allah’s  leave?”  And  Allah  is  with 
As-Sdbirin  (the  patient).} 


692 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlur 

Allah  states  that  Talut,  the  king  of  the  Children  of  Israel, 
marched  forth  with  his  soldiers  and  the  Israelites  who  obeyed 
him.  His  army  was  of  eighty  thousand  then,  according  to  As- 
Suddi,*11  but  Allah  knows  best.  Talut  said: 


iVerily,  Allah  will  try  you } 

meaning,  He  will  test  you  with  a  river,  which  flowed  between 
Jordan  and  Palestine,  i.e.,  the  Shari'ah  river,  according  to  Ibn 
‘Abbas  and  others.121  He  continued, 


iSo  whoever  drinks  thereof,  he  is  not  of  me;} 
meaning,  shall  not  accompany  me  today, 


4'i4  S#  C&d  $  ^  xh  “  P  > 


iand  whoever  tastes  it  not,  he  is  of  me,  except  him  who  takes 
(thereof)  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand.} 


meaning,  there  is  no  harm  in  this  case.  Allah  then  said: 


\S£»} 


iYet,  they  drank  thereof,  all,  except  a  few  of  them.} 

Ibn  Jurayj  stated  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented,  “Whoever 
took  some  of  it  (the  river’s  water)  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand, 
quenched  his  thirst;  as  for  those  who  drank  freely  from  it, 
their  thirst  was  not  quenched.” 

Ibn  Jarir  reported  that  Al-Bara’  bin  ‘Azib  said,  “We  used  to 
say  that  the  Companions  of  Muhammad  jg  who  accompanied 
him  on  the  battle  of  Badr  were  more  than  three  hundred  and 
ten,  just  as  many  as  the  soldiers  who  crossed  the  river  with 
Talut.  Only  those  who  believed  crossed  the  river  with  him.”*3' 
Al-Bukhari  also  reported  this.14' 

This  is  why  Allah  said: 


#f  GS  S3 (L'S  ijid  ,<Z 


j*  M»Vr 


111  At-Tabari  5:339. 

121  At-Tabari  5:340. 

131  At-Tabari  5:345,346,347. 
141  Fath  Al-Bari  7 :339 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Baggrgh  (225  -  252)  (Part-2 


693 


4  So  when  he  had  crossed  it  (the  river),  he  and  those  who 
believed  with  him,  they  said:  'We  have  no  power  this  day 
against  Jalut  (Goliath)  and  his  hosts."}  * 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  the  Israelites  (who  remained  with 
Saul)  thought  that  they  were  few  in  the  face  of  their  enemy 
who  were  many  then.  So,  their  knowledgeable  scholars 
strengthened  their  resolve  by  stating  that  Allah’s  promise  is 
true  and  that  triumph  comes  from  Allah  Alone,  not  from  the 
large  numbers  or  the  adequacy  of  the  supplies.  They  said  to 
them: 


i''Hoiv  often  has  a  small  group  overcome  a  mighty  host  by 
Allah’s  leave?"  And  Allah  is  with  As-Sdbirin  (the  patient).} 


ufio  AP  S&  A  &  CMS  iL( 

$ 

&&  &X 


4250.  And  when  they  advanced  to  meet  Jalut  (Goliath)  and  his 
farces,  they  invoked:  "Our  Lord!  Pour  forth  on  us  patience, 
and  set  firm  our  feet  and  make  us  victorious  over  the 
disbelieving  people."} 

4251.  So  they  routed  them  by  Allah’s  leave  and  Ddwud  (David) 
killed  Jalut  (Goliath),  and  Allah  gave  him  (Ddwud)  the  kingdom 
[after  the  death  of  Talut  and  Samuel]  and  Al-Hikmah 
(prophethood),  and  taught  him  of  that  which  He  willed.  And  if 
Allah  did  not  check  one  set  of  people  by  means  of  another,  the 
earth  would  indeed  be  full  of  mischief.  But  Allah  is  full  of 
bounty  to  the  ' Alarnin  (mankind.  Jinn  and  all  that  exists).} 

4252.  These  are  the  verses  of  Allah,  We  recite  them  to  you  (O 
Mulyunmad  sk)  in  truth,  and  surely,  you  are  one  of  the 
Messengers  (of  Allah.} 

When  the  faithful  parly,  who  were  few  under  the  command 
of  TalQt,  faced  their  enemy,  who  were  many  under  the 
command  of  Jalut, 


694 


Tafsjir  Ibn  Kathir 


4<&>  IL&  yi  ij3v^> 

4  they  invoked:  " Our  Lord!  Pour  forth  on  us  patience...") 
meaning,  send  down  patience  on  us  from  You. 

iand  set  firm  our  feet ) 

t 

meaning,  against  the  enemy  and  save  us  from  running  away 
and  from  feebleness, 

id#* ; 

iand  make  us  victorious  over  the  disbelieving  people.) 

Allah  said: 

4So  they  routed  them  by  Allah's  leave) 

meaning,  they  defeated  and  overwhelmed  them  by  Allah’s  aid 
and  support.  Then, 

iand  Dawud  killed  Jaliit) 

Israelite  accounts  claimed  that  (Prophet)  David  killed  Goliath 
with  a  slingshot  that  he  had,  which  he  launched  at  Goliath 
causing  his  death. 

TalOt  promised  that  whoever  killed  Jalut,  would  marry  his 
daughter  and  would  share  his  kingship  and  authority.  He  kept 
his  promise.  Later,  the  kingship  was  transferred  to  Prophet 
Dawud  in  addition  to  being  granted  Prophethood  by  Allah.  So, 
Allah  said: 

id. jfcH  a  issi  tj) 

4 . .  .and  Allah  gave  him  (Dawud)  the  kingdom) 
that  Talut  had  and, 

4*JCUj) 

iand  Al-Hikmah)  that  comes  with  the  prophethood,  meaning, 
after  Shamwil.  [Allah  then  said:] 

4'fcZ  l£.  &Zj) 


Surah  2.  AUBgggrgh  (2 25  -  252)  (Part 2 


695 


iand  taught  him  of  that  which  He  willed.} 

meaning,  what  He  willed  of  the  knowledge  that  He  bestowed 
on  (Prophet)  Dawud. 

Next,  Allah  said: 

iAnd  if  Allah  did  not  check  one  set  of  people  by  means  of 
another,  the  earth  would  indeed  be  full  of  mischief  .} 

This  Ayah  indicates  that  if  it  were  not  for  the  fact  that  Allah 
checks  one  set  of  people  with  another,  such  as  when  Talut 
and  the  bravery  of  Dawud  helped  the  Children  of  Israel 
(against  Goliath),  then  people  would  have  perished.  Similarly, 
Allah  said: 


Z*  >  /*"■  **  '<  s'  '  > 

Oj  J**! — 4  •  O'ii-v*  i  * 


4’^==>  $  (►-' 


iFor  had  it  not  been  that  Allah  checks  one  set  of  people  by 
means  of  another,  monasteries,  churches,  synagogues,  and 
Masjids,  wherein  the  Name  of  Allah  is  mentioned  much,  would 
surely,  have  been  pulled  down.}  (22:40) 


Allah  then  said: 


df  — *•*  c^=eij} 

iBut  Allah  is  full  of  bounty  to  the  'Alamin  (mankind,  Jinn  and 
all  that  exists)} 

meaning,  by  His  mercy  and  favor  He  fixes  some  of  them  by 
some  others.  Surely,  Allah  has  the  wisdom,  the  supreme 
authority  and  the  clear  proof  against  His  creation  in  all  of  His 
actions  and  statements. 

Allah  said: 


dx 3Z  M 


iThese  are  the  verses  of  Allah,  We  recite  them  to  you  (O 
Muhammad  jfe)  in  truth,  and  surely,  you  are  one  of  the 
Messengers  (of  Allah).} 

This  Ayah  states,  These  Ayat  (verses)  of  Allah  that  We  have 
narrated  for  you  in  truth  conform  to  the  exact  manner  that 
these  stories  have  occurred  and  to  the  truth  that  still  remain 


S22 _ Tgfstr  Ibn  Kathir 

in  the  (Divine)  Books  that  the  scholars  of  the  Children  of  Israel 
have  and  know.  Allah  said:  O  Muhammad, 

iyou  arc > 

ione  of  the  Messengers  (of  Allah))  emphatically  stating  the  truth 
of  his  prophethood741 

This  is  the  End  of  Volume  One  with  the  Tafsfr  of  Surat 
Al-Baqarah,  verse .  252.. 

☆  Volume  Two  begins  with  Surat  Al-Baqarah ,  verse.  253. 




## === VOLUME 2: Q2:253-286 (Ayat al-Kursi 2:255, last 2 verses 2:284-286) ===

(Part-3) 


j  ly  ■*'  4  ^  f f  V_>  *~n  V  if&  >»  <4^  V 

«  %  u  jfi  vi  ,ic*  £;  cfir  is  <; 

cp‘f  %  v;  3&  ^  ii-t  c?;  *cs  4  v>  .J? 


4255.  A//fl/i/  None  /ws  the  right  to  be  worshipped  but  He,  the 
Ever  Living,  the  One  Who  sustains  and  protects  all  that  exists. 
Neither  slumber  nor  sleep  overtakes  Him.  To  Him  belongs 
whatever  is  in  the  heavens  and  whatever  is  on  the  earth .  Who  is 
he  that  can  intercede  with  Him  except  with  His  permission?  He 
knows  what  happens  to  them  (His  creatures)  in  this  world,  and 
what  will  happen  to  them  in  the  Hereafter.  And  they  will  never 
compass  anything  of  His  Knowledge  except  that  which  He  wills. 
His  Kursi  extends  over  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  and  He  feels 
no  fatigue  in  guarding  and  preserving  thetn.  And  He  is  the 
Most  High,  the  Most  Great.} 


The  Virtue  of  Ay  at  Al-Kursi 

This  is  Ayat  Al-Kursi  and  tremendous  virtues  have  been 
associated  with  it,  for  the  authentic  Hadith  describes  it  as  ‘the 
greatest  Ayah  in  the  Book  of  Allah.’  Imam  Ahmad  recorded 
that  TJbayy  bin  Ka*b  said  that  the  Prophet  asked  him  about 
the  greatest  Ayah  in  the  Book  of  Allah,  and  TJbayy  answered, 
“Allah  and  His  Messenger  know  better.”  When  the  Prophet 
repeated  his  question  several  times,  TJbayy  said,  “Ayat  Al- 
KursL’’  The  Prophet  commented, 


i  L l— J  I4J  j j  1 0 jiL  ^ ... ■  1  t  jX*J I  Li  ^_L*J l  . *l*^  Is 

* xp 


4 Congratulations  for  having  knowledge,  O  Abu  Al-Mundhir! 

By  He  in  Whose  Hand  is  my  soul!  This  Ayah  has  a  tongue  and 
two  lips  with  which  site  praises  the  King  (Allah)  next  to  the  leg 
of  the  Throne. 

This  Hadith  was  also  collected  by  Muslim*2*  ,  but  he  did  not 


***  Ahmad  5 :14. 
*2*  Muslim  1  :556. 


22 _ Tafsir  Ibtt  Kathir 

include  the  part  that  starts  with,  “By  He  in  Whose  Hand...” 

Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Abu  Ayyub  said  that  he  had 
some  dates  and  a  Ghoul^1*  used  to  take  some,  and  he 
complained  to  the  Prophet.  The  Prophet  £g  said  to  him,  “When 
you  see  her,  say,  ‘In  the  Name  of  Allah,  answer  to  the 
Messenger  of  Allah’.”  Abu  Ayyub  said  that  when  she  came 
again,  he  said  these  words  and  he  was  able  to  grab  her.  She 
begged,  “I  will  not  come  again,”  so  Abu  Ayyub  released  her.  Abu 
Ayyub  went  to  the  Prophet  jg  and  the  Prophet  asked  him, 
“What  did  your  prisoner  do?”  Abu  Ayyub  said,  “I  grabbed  her 
and  she  said  twice,  ‘I  will  not  come  again,’  and  I  released  her.” 
The  Prophet  jg  said,  “She  will  come  back.”  Abu  Ayyub  said,  “So 
I  grabbed  her  twice  or  three  times,  yet  each  time  [I  would 
release  her  when]  she  vowed  not  to  come  back.  I  would  go  to 
the  Prophet  jg  who  would  ask  me,  What  is  the  news  of  your 
prisoner?’  1  would  say,  1  grabbed  her,  then  released  her  when 
she  said  that  she  would  not  return.’  The  Prophet  sg  would  say 
that  she  would  return.  Once,  I  grabbed  her  and  she  said, 
‘Release  me  and  I  will  teach  you  something  to  recite  so  that  no 
harm  touches  you,  that  is,  Ayat  Al-KursL’  Abu  Ayyub  went  to 
the  Prophet  jg  and  told  him,  and  the  Prophet  sg  said,  “She  is 
liar,  but  she  told  the  truth. ”,2)  At-Tirmidhi  recorded  this  Hadith 
in  the  chapter  of  the  virtues  of  the  Qur’an  and  said,  “Hasan 
Ghanb .”^3'  In  Arabic,  ‘Ghoul’  refers  to  the  Jinn  when  they 
appear  at  night. 

Al-Bukhari  recorded  a  similar  story  in  his  Sahih  from  Abu 
Hurayrah,  in  the  chapters  on  the  virtues  of  the  Qur’an  and 
the  description  of  Shaytan.  In  this  narration,  Abu  Hurayrah 
said, 

“Allah’s  Messenger  assigned  me  to  keep  watch  over  the 
Sadaqah  (charity)  of  Ramadan.  A  person  snuck  in  and  started 
taking  handfuls  of  foodstuff.  I  caught  him  and  said,  13y  Allah, 
I  will  take  you  to  Allah’s  Messenger.’  He  said,  ‘Release  me,  for  I 
am  meek  and  have  many  dependents  and  am  in  great  need.’  I 
released  him,  and  in  the  morning  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  asked 

l1'  That  is  a  category  of  the  Jinn,  attributed  with  many  different 
characteristics  by  different  scholars . 

121  Ahmad  5 :422 . 

131  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8 : 1 83 . 


23 


Surah  2 ,  Al-Bacjarali  [ Pnrf-3 ) 

me,  What  did  your  prisoner  do  yesterday,  O  Abu  Hurayrah?’  I 
said,  ‘O  Allah’s  Messenger!  He  complained  of  being  needy  and 
of  having  many  dependents,  so  I  pitied  him  and  let  him  go.’ 
Allah’s  Messenger  jg  said,  Indeed,  he  told  you  a  lie  and  will  be 
coming  again.’  I  believed  that  he  would  show  up  again,  for 
Allah’s  Messenger  jg  had  told  me  that  he  would  return.  So,  I 
watched  for  him.  When  he  (showed  up  and)  started  stealing 
handfuls  of  foodstuff,  I  caught  hold  of  him  again  and  said,  *1 
will  definitely  take  you  to  Allah’s  Messenger.’  He  said,  ‘Leave 
me,  for  I  am  very  needy  and  have  many  dependents.  1  promise  I 
will  not  come  back  again.’  I  pitied  him  and  let  him  go.  In  the 
morning  Allah’s  Messenger  sg  asked  me,  What  did  your 
prisoner  do  last  night,  O  Abu  Hurayrah!’  I  replied,  ‘O  Allah’s 
Messenger!  He  complained  of  his  great  need  and  of  too  many 
dependents,  so  I  took  pity  on  him  and  set  him  free.’  Allah’s 
Messenger  jg  said,  Verily,  he  told  you  a  lie;  he  will  return.’  I 
waited  for  him  attentively  for  the  third  time,  and  when  he 
(came  and)  started  stealing  handfuls  of  the  foodstuff,  I  caught 
hold  of  him  and  said,  ‘I  will  surely  take  you  to  Allah’s 
Messenger  as  it  is  the  third  time  you  promised  not  to  return, 
yet  you  returned.’  He  said,  ‘Let  me  teach  you  some  words  which 
Allah  will  give  you  benefit  from.’  I  asked,  What  are  they?’  He 
replied,  Whenever  you  go  to  bed,  recite  Ayat  Al-Kursi-  AUahu  la 
ilaha  ilia  Huwal-Hayyul-Qayyum ,  till  you  finish  the  whole  verse. 
(If  you  do  so),  Allah  will  appoint  a  guard  for  you  who  will  stay 
with  you,  and  no  Shaytan  will  come  near  you  until  morning.’ 
So,  I  released  him.  In  the  morning,  Allah’s  Messenger  jg  asked, 
What  did  your  prisoner  do  yesterday?’  I  replied,  ‘O  Allah’s 
Messenger!  He  claimed  that  he  would  teach  me  some  words  by 
which  Allah  will  grant  me  some  benefit,  so  I  let  him  go.’  Allah’s 
Messenger  jg  asked,  What  are  they?’  I  replied,  “He  said  to  me: 
Whenever  you  go  to  bed,  recite  Ayat  Al-Kursi  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end,  Allahu  la  ilaha  ilia  Huwal-Hayyul- 
Qayyum.  He  further  said  to  me:  (If  you  do  so),  Allah  will 
appoint  a  guard  for  you  who  will  stay  with  you,  and  no  Shaytan 
will  come  near  you  until  morning.’  (One  of  the  narrators)  then 
commented  that  they  (the  Companions)  were  very  keen  to  do 
good  deeds.  The  Prophet  jg  said,  ‘He  spoke  the  truth,  although 
he  is  a  liar.  Do  you  know  whom  you  were  talking  to,  these  three 
nights,  O  Abu  Hurayrah?’  Abu  Hurayrah  said,  ‘No.’  He  said.  It 


25 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) 


4 Allah!  None  has  the  right  to  be  worshipped  but  He,  the  Ever 
Living,  the  One  Who  sustains  and  protects  all  that  exists > 
[2:255);  in  Al  ‘Imran,  it  is  in, 


4Alif-Ldm-Mim .  Allah!  None  has  the  right  to  be  worshipped 
but  He,  the  Ever  Living,  the  One  Who  sustains  and  protects  all 
that  exists}  [3:1-2],  while  in  Ta-Ha,  it  is  in, 


iAttd  (all)  faces  shall  be  humbled  before  (Allah),  the  Ever 
Living,  the  One  Who  sustains  and  protects  all  that  exists } 
[20:111).” 


Ayat  Al-Kursi  has  Ten  Complete  Arabic  Sentences 

1.  Allah’s  statement, 

4^  \  '** 


4 Allah!  None  has  the  right  to  be  worshipped  but  He  } 
mentions  that  Allah  is  the  One  and  Only  Lord  of  all  creation. 

2.  Allah’s  statement, 

ifc # 

4Al-Hayyul-Qayyum}  testifies  that  Allah  is  the  Ever  Living,  Who 
never  dies,  Who  sustains  everyone  and  everything.  All  creation 
stands  in  need  of  Allah  and  totally  relies  on  Him,  while  He  is 
the  Most  Rich,  Who  stands  in  need  of  nothing  created. 
Similarly,  Allah  said, 

4‘)y\  uiyll)  ILjJ'  piJ  o' 

4Attd  among  His  signs  is  that  the  heaven  and  the  earth  stand 
by  His  command }  [30:25]. 

3.  Allah’s  statement, 

4}l  l} 

4Neither  slumber  nor  sleep  overtakes  Him} 
means,  no  shortcoming,  unawareness  or  ignorance  ever 


26 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlur 


touches  Allah.  Rather,  He  is  aware  of,  and  controls  what  every 
soul  earns,  has  perfect  watch  over  everything,  nothing  escapes 
His  knowledge,  and  no  secret  matter  is  secret  to  Him.  Among 
His  perfect  attributes,  is  the  fact  that  He  is  never  effected  by 
slumber  or  sleep.  Therefore,  Allah’s  statement, 


iNeither  slumber  overtakes  Him}  indicates  that  no  unawareness 
due  to  slumber  ever  overtakes  Allah.  Allah  said  afterwards, 


^} 


inor  sleep},  which  is  stronger  than  slumber.  It  is  recorded  in 
the  Safiih*11  that  Abu  Musa  said,  “The  Messenger  of  Allah 
delivered  a  speech  regarding  four  words: 


J-**  Q\  {f'y.  <•***/. j  j'  d  sJj  'j  3il  jl» 

"J  ~  j&'  J  "  jp1  J-**  Ji^1  ‘  J^11  J-^ 


oAlldh  does  not  sleep,  and  it  does  not  befit  His  majesty  that  He 
sleeps.  He  lowers  the  scales  and  raises  them.  The  deeds  of  the 
day  are  resurrected  in  front  of  Him  before  the  deeds  of  the 
night,  and  the  deeds  of  the  night  before  the  deeds  of  the  day. 
His  Veil  is  light,  or  fire,  and  if  He  removes  it,  the  rays  from 
His  Face  would  burn  whatever  His  sight  reaches  of  His 
creation .» 


4.  Allah’s  statement, 


4To  Him  belongs  whatever  is  in  the  heavens  and  whatever  is  on 
the  earth} 

indicates  that  everyone  is  a  servant  for  Allah,  a  part  of  His 
kingdom  and  under  His  power  and  authority.  Similarly,  Allah 
said, 


Muslim  1  :161 . 


27 


Surah  2 ,  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) _ 

iThere  is  none  in  the  heavens  and  the  earth  but  comes  unto  the 
Most  Gracious  (Allah)  as  a  servant.  Verily,  He  knows  each  one 
of  them,  and  has  counted  them  a  full  counting.  And  everyone 
of  them  will  come  to  Him  alone  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection 
(without  any  helper,  or  protector  or  defender )}  [19:93-95]. 

5.  Allah’s  statement, 

-J  iJ$  'i 


iWho  is  he  that  can  intercede  with  Him  except  with  His 
permission?} 

is  similar  to  His  statements, 


J  £  k  ^  4  £  &  & 

i  f? 


iAnd  there  are  many  angels  in  the  heavens,  whose  intercession 
will  avail  nothing  except  after  Allah  has  given  leave  for  whom 
He  wills  and  is  pleased  with }  [53:26],  and, 

/  /  *4'  ✓  *  -  ix  K.*\_ 

iis^j'  VI  XjF 


iThey  cannot  intercede  except  for  him  ivith  whom  He  is 
pleased >  [21:28]. 

These  Ay  at  assert  Allah’s  greatness,  pride,  and  grace,  and 
that  no  one  dares  to  intercede  with  Him  on  behalf  of  anyone 
else,  except  by  His  permission.  Indeed,  the  Hadith  about  the 
intercession,  states  that  the  Prophet  said, 


:  tj  L.L  ij  ^  *14  t*  t  ^  *  *  -  >*j 


«/  will  stand  under  the  Throne  and  fall  in  prostration,  and 
Allah  will  allow  me  to  remain  in  that  position  as  much  os  He 
wills.  I  will  thereafter  be  told,  "Raise  your  head,  speak  and  you 
will  be  heard,  intercede  and  your  intercession  ivill  be  accepted"  . 
The  Prophet  then  said,  "He  will  allow  me  a  proportion 
whom  I  will  enter  into  Paradise. "n11* 


6.  Allah’s  statement, 


1*1  Muslim  1  :180. 


28 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kgthir 


4He  knows  what  happens  to  them  (His  creatures)  in  this  world, 
and  what  will  happen  to  them  in  the  Hereafter} 

this  refers  to  His  perfect  knowledge  of  all  creation;  its  past, 
present  and  future.  Similarly,  Allah  said  that  the  angels 
proclaimed; 


Cj  iU'i  <<Jj  Cj  Oil.  Cj  C-d  O &  £  %  >&J  'Zl  J32  Cj} 


iAnd  we  (angels)  descend  not  except  by  the  command  of  your 
Lord  (O  Muhammad  .  To  Him  belongs  what  is  before  us  and 
what  is  behind  us ,  and  what  is  between  those  two;  and  your 
Lord  is  never  forgetful >  [19:64], 

7.  Allah’s  statement, 


iAnd  they  will  never  compass  anything  of  His  Knowledge 
except  that  which  He  wills K 

asserts  the  fact  that  no  one  attains  any  part  of  Allah’s 
knowledge  except  what  Allah  conveys  and  allows.  This  part  of 
the  Ayah  indicates  that  no  one  ever  acquires  knowledge  of 
Allah  and  in  His  Attributes,  except  what  He  conveys  to  them. 
For  instance,  Allah  said, 

v* 


iBut  they  will  never  compass  anything  of  His  knowledge} 

[20:110]. 

8.  Allah  said, 

lL.jr  y;} 

}His  Kursi  extends  over  the  heavens  and  the  earth.} 

Wald'  narrated  in  his  Tafsir  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “ Kursi  is 
the  footstool,  and  no  one  is  able  to  give  due  consideration  to 
[Allah’s]  Throne.”11'  Al-Hakim  recorded  this  Hadith  in  his 
Mustadrak)2i  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  who  did  not  relate  it  to  the 
Prophet  jg$.  Al-Hakim  said,  “It  is  Sahlh  according  to  the  criteria 


I1'  At-Tabarani  12:39. 
121  Al-Hakim  2 :282 . 


29 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) 

of  the  Two  Sahihs,  and  they  (Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim)  did  not 
record  it.”  In  addition,  Ad-Dahhak  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “If 
the  seven  heavens  and  the  seven  earths  were  flattened  and  laid 
side  by  side,  they  would  add  up  to  the  size  of  a  ring  in  a  desert, 
compared  to  the  KursL 
9.  Allah  said, 


iAnd  He  feels  no  fatigue  in  guarding  and  preserving  them ^ 

meaning,  it  does  not  burden  or  cause  Him  fatigue  to  protect 
the  heavens  and  earth  and  all  that  is  in  between  them. 
Rather,  this  is  an  easy  matter  for  Him.  Further,  Allah  sustains 
everything,  has  perfect  watch  over  everything,  nothing  ever 
escapes  His  knowledge  and  no  matter  is  ever  a  secret  to  Him. 
All  matters  are  insignificant,  modest  and  humble  before  Him. 
He  is  the  Most  Rich,  worthy  of  all  praise.  He  does  what  He 
wills,  and  no  one  can  ask  Him  about  what  He  does,  while  they 
will  be  asked.  He  has  supreme  power  over  sill  things  and 
perfect  alertness  concerning  everything.  He  is  the  Most  High, 
the  Greatest,  there  is  no  deity  worthy  of  worship  except  Him, 
and  no  Lord  other  than  Him. 

10.  Allah’s  statement, 


iArid  He  is  the  Most  High ,  the  Most  Great ^  is  similar  to  His 
statement, 


ithe  Most  Great ,  the  Most  High$  (13:9). 

These  and  similar  Ayat  and  authentic  Hadiths  about  Allah's 
Attributes  must  be  treated  the  way  the  Salaf  (righteous 
ancestors)  treated  them  by  accepting  their  apparent  meanings 
without  equating  them  (with  the  attributes  of  the  creation]  or 
altering  their  apparent  meanings. 


111  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3:981. 


30 


Tafsfr  Ibn  Katlnr 


i256.  There  is  no  compulsion  in  religion.  Verily,  the  right  path 
has  become  distinct  from  the  wrong  path.  Whoever  disbelieves 
in  Tdglnit  and  believes  in  Allah,  then  he  has  grasped  the  most 
trustworthy  handhold  that  will  never  break.  And  Allah  is  All- 
Hearer,  All-Knower  .f 


No  Compulsion  in  Religion 

Allah  said, 

A~J.fr  4 


iThere  is  no  compulsion  in  religion meaning,  “Do  not  force 
anyone  to  become  Muslim,  for  Islam  is  plain  and  clear,  and  its 
proofs  and  evidence  are  plain  and  clear.  Therefore,  there  is  no 
need  to  force  anyone  to  embrace  Islam.  Rather,  whoever  Allah 
directs  to  Islam,  opens  his  heart  for  it  and  enlightens  his  mind, 
will  embrace  Islam  with  certainty.  Whoever  Allah  blinds  his 
heart  and  seals  his  hearing  and  sight,  then  he  will  not  benefit 
from  being  forced  to  embrace  Islam.” 

It  was  reported  that  the  Ansar  were  the  reason  behind 
revealing  this  Ayah,  although  its  indication  is  general  in 
meaning.  Ibn  Jarir  recorded  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  {that  before 
Islam],  “When  (an  Ansar)  woman  would  not  bear  children  who 
would  live,  she  would  vow  that  if  she  gives  birth  to  a  child 
who  remains  alive,  she  would  raise  him  as  a  Jew.  When  Banu 
An-Nadlr  (the  Jewish  tribe)  were  evacuated  [from  Al-Madinah], 
some  of  the  children  of  the  Ansar  were  being  raised  among 
them,  and  the  Ansar  said,  “We  will  not  abandon  our  children.’ 
Allah  revealed, 


O'  i  i  Sjl'  4  l 


iThere  is  no  compulsion  in  religion.  Verily,  the  right  path  has 
become  distinct  from  the  ivrong  path.$”^] 

Abu  Dawud  and  An-Nasa’i^  also  recorded  this  Hadlth. 

As  for  the  Hadith  that  Imam  Ahmad  recorded,  in  which  Anas 
said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said  to  a  man, 

«Ujl S  Sis  :  Jli  UjlS  jfrA  J\  :  Jii 

111  At-Jabari  5:407. 

,2'  Abu  Dawud  3  : 132 ,  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  6 :304 . 


*" Embrace  Islam/'  The  man  said ,  " I  dislike  it."  The  Prophet 
*£  said ,  "Even  if  you  dislike  it."^}] 

First,  this  is  an  authentic  Hadlth ,  with  only  three  narrators 
between  Imam  Ahmad  and  the  Prophet  However,  it  is  not 
relevant  to  the  subject  under  discussion,  for  the  Prophet  did 
not  force  that  man  to  become  Muslim.  The  Prophet  merely 
invited  this  man  to  become  Muslim,  and  he  replied  that  he  does 
not  find  himself  eager  to  become  Muslim.  The  Prophet  ££  said 
to  the  man  that  even  though  he  dislikes  embracing  Islam,  he 
should  still  embrace  it,  Tor  Allah  will  grant  you  sincerity  and 
true  intent.' 


Tawhid  is  the  Most  Trustworthy  Handhold 

Allah's  statement, 


«  f  v 

*ilL>  >  •  j*  y »  u*->7 

4>  *_\'r  * 


iWhoever  disbelieves  in  Tdghut  and  believes  in  Allah ,  then  he 
has  grasped  the  most  trustworthy  handhold  that  zuill  never 
break.  And  Allah  is  All-Hearer ,  All-Knozver^ 


is  in  reference  to,  “Whoever  shuns  the  rivals  of  Allah,  the 
idols,  and  those  that  Shaytan  calls  to  be  worshipped  besides 
Allah,  whoever  believes  in  Allah's  Oneness,  worships  Him 
alone  and  testifies  that  there  is  no  deity  worthy  of  worship 
except  Him,  then 


ithen  he  Iws  grasped  the  most  trustworthy  handhold. $ 

Therefore,  this  person  will  have  acquired  firmness  [in  the 
religion]  and  proceeded  on  the  correct  way  and  the  straight 
path.  Abu  Al-Qasim  Al-Baghawi  recorded  that  ‘Umar  said,  Vibt 
means  magic,  and  Taghut  means  Shaytan.  Verily,  courage  and 
cowardice  are  two  instincts  that  appear  in  men,  the 
courageous  fights  for  those  whom  he  does  not  know  and  the 
coward  runs  away  from  defending  his  own  mother.  Man's 
honor  resides  with  his  religion  and  his  status  is  based  upon 

m 


Ahmad  3 ;  181 . 


32 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kgthir 


his  character,  even  if  he  was  Persian  or  Nabatian.”11*  Umar’s 
statement  that  Taghut  is  Shaytan  is  very  sound,  for  this 
meaning  includes  every  type  of  evil  that  the  ignorant  people  of 
Jahiliyyah  (pre  Islamic  era  of  ignorace)  fell  into,  such  as 
worshipping  idols,  referring  to  them  for  judgement,  and 
invoking  them  for  victory. 

Allah’s  statement, 


ithen  he  has  grasped  the  most  trustworthy  handhold  that  will 
never  break} 


means,  “He  will  have  hold  of  the  true  religion  with  the 
strongest  grasp.”  Allah  equated  this  adherence  to  the  firm 
handhold  that  never  breaks  because  it  is  built  solid  and 
because  its  handle  is  firmly  connected.  This  is  why  Allah  said 
here. 


id 


ithen  he  has  grasped  the  most  trustworthy  handhold  that  will 
never  break.} 

Mujahid  said,  “The  most  trustworthy  handhold  is  Iman 
(faith). ”*2*  As-Suddi  said  that  it  refers  to  Islam.13*  Imam 
Ahmad  recorded  that  Qays  bin  ‘Abbad  said,  “I  was  in  the 
Masjid  when  a  man  whose  face  showed  signs  of  humbleness 
came  and  prayed  two  Rak'ahs  that  were  modest  in  length. 
The  people  said.  This  is  a  man  from  among  the  people  of 
Paradise.’  When  he  left,  I  followed  him  until  he  entered  his 
house,  and  I  entered  it  after  him  and  spoke  with  him.  When 
he  felt  at  ease,  I  said  to  him,  When  you  entered  the  Masjid, 
the  people  said  such  and  such  things.’  He  said,  ‘All  praise  is 
due  to  Allah!  No  one  should  say  what  he  has  no  knowledge 
of.  I  will  tell  you  why  they  said  that.  I  saw  a  vision  during 
the  time  of  the  Messenger  of  Allah,  and  I  narrated  it  to  him. 
I  saw  that  I  was  in  a  green  garden,’  and  he  described  the 
garden’s  plants  and  spaciousness,  ‘and  there  was  an  iron 


* 1  *  At-Tabari  5 :4 1 7 .  Nabatian  refers  to  a  people  who  resided  in 
Jordan ,  i  .e .  even  if  he  was  not  an  Arab . 

121  At-Tabari  5:421 . 

*3*  At-Tabari  5 :42 1 . 


33 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (Partial 


/ 


tr 

z>jj  <4  ^  $ '  J!^-’  ^  (|p 

tl_/4_s  i  \  4J  ^  r>\d&S\&\ iji;  jl 

btjlS  c^~J>3 

^#ji  $ 

4JU' » ii*  ^t/4  i$  ijjli-,  uPyjs-!/  ili^ 

"  i,^  >1"  -  £ 

C*lj  /%  j\&  *Ol>»  4Ji'<OU*o  l£J^»  JOo 

SJil^^lij  Jj  Jli^j^jjkuojl  olJ  J\S 
l^jJJai'j  -Cjll 

3iJJ&jLx*M'k£^£*iS 

^lU' 


|p  4i'  o^  j  d)y? 


pole  in  the  middle  of 
the  garden  affixed  in 
the  earth  and  its  tip 
reached  the  sky.  On 
its  tip,  there  was  a 
handle,  and  I  was 
told  to  ascend  the 
pole.  I  said,  ‘I 
cannot.’  Then  a 
helper  came  and 
raised  my  robe  from 
behind  and  said  to 
me,  ‘Ascend.’  I 
ascended  until  I 
grasped  the  handle 
and  he  said  to  me, 
‘Hold  on  to  the 
handle.’  I  awoke 
from  that  dream  with 
the  handle  in  my 
hand.  I  went  to  the 
Messenger  of  Allah 
2g  and  told  him 
about  the  vision  and 
he  said. 


^  iyji i  c\j  >ysi  i %  ij>y)  ul» 

^ I  it  C-il  ojy*Jl 


«As  for  the  garden,  it  represents  Islam;  as  for  the  pole,  it 
represents  the  pillar  of  Islam;  and  the  handle  represents  the 
most  trustworthy  handhold.  You  shall  remain  Muslim  until  you 
die .» 

This  Companion  was  ‘Abdullah  bin  Salam.”*1* 

This  Hadith  was  also  collected  in  the  Two  Sahihs ;*21  and  Al- 

Bukhari  also  recorded  it  with  another  chain  of  narration.131 

111  Ahmad  5:452. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  7:161,  Muslim  4  : 1 930 . 

131  Fath  Al-Bari  2:418. 


34 


Tafsir  Ibu  Kathir 


j$'  Jl  yXii  Si  i^>*  jj  Zfy 

^  r*  cX&i  ji  JK  IJ& 

^  Ail** 


4257.  Allah  is  the  Walt  (Protector  or  Guardian)  of  those  who 
believe.  He  brings  them  out  from  darknesses  into  light.  But  as 
for  those  toho  disbelieve,  their  Awliyd'  (supporters  and  helpers) 
are  Tdghiit  (false  deities  and  false  leaders),  they  bring  them  out 
from  light  into  darknesses.  Those  are  the  dwellers  of  the  Fire, 
and  they  will  abide  therein  forever. > 

Allah  stated  that  whoever  follows  what  pleases  Him,  He  will 
guide  him  to  the  paths  of  peace,  that  is  Islam,  or  Paradise. 
Verily,  Allah  delivers  His  believing  servants  from  the  darkness 
of  disbelief,  doubt  and  hesitation,  to  the  light  of  the  plain, 
clear,  explained,  easy  and  unequivocal  truth.  He  also  stated 
that  Shaytan  is  the  supporter  of  the  disbelievers  who 
beautifies  the  paths  of  ignorance  and  misguidance  that  they 
follow,  thus  causing  them  to  deviate  from  the  true  path  into 
disbelief  and  wickedness. 


iThose  are  the  dioellers  of  the  Fire,  and  they  will  abide  therein 
forever.  > 


This  is  why  Allah  mentioned  the  light  in  the  singular  while 
mentioned  the  darkness  in  the  plural,  because  truth  is  one, 
while  disbelief  comes  as  several  types,  all  of  which  are  false! 
Similarly,  Allah  said, 


(Xl'i  — '  ij* 


<>>? 


{And  verily,  this  is  my  straight  path,  so  follow  it,  and  follow 
not  (other)  paths,  for  they  will  separate  you  away  from  His 
path.  This  He  has  ordained  for  you  that  you  may  have  Taqwa$ 
[6:153), 


{And  originated  the  darknesses  and  the  lights  [6:1],  and, 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) 


35 


ito  the  right  and  to  the  lefts}  [16:48]. 

There  are  many  other  Ayat  on  the  subject  that  mention  the 
truth  in  the  singular  and  falsehood  in  the  plural,  because  of 
falsehood’s  many  divisions  and  branches. 


fji!'  ifJ-r.  V 


4258.  Have  you  not  looked  at  him  who  disputed  with  Ibrahim 
about  his  Lord  (Allah),  because  Allah  had  given  him  the 
kingdom?  When  Ibrahim  said  (to  hint):  "My  Lord  is  He  Who 
gives  life  and  causes  death.”  He  said,  "I  give  life  and  cause 
death."  Ibrahim  said,  “ Verily ,  Allah  brings  the  sun  from  the 
east;  then  bring  it  you  from  the  west."  So  the  disbeliever  was 
utterly  defeated.  And  Allah  guides  not  the  people,  who  are 
wrongdoers.} 


The  Debate  Between  Ibrahim  Al-Khalil  and  King  Nimrod 

The  king  who  disputed  with  Ibrahim  was  King  Nimrod,  son 
of  Canaan,  son  of  Kush,  son  of  Sam,  son  of  Noah,  as  Mujahid 
stated.  It  was  also  said  that  he  was  Nimrod,  son  of  Falikh,  son 
of  ‘Abir,  son  of  Shalikh,  son  of  Arfakhshand,  son  of  Sam,  son 
of  Noah.  Mujahid  said,  “The  kings  who  ruled  the  eastern  and 
western  parts  of  the  world  Eire  four,  two  believers  and  two 
disbelievers.  As  for  the  two  believing  kings,  they  were 
Sulayman  bin  Dawud  and  Dhul-Qamayn.  As  for  the  two 
disbelieving  kings,  they  were  Nimrod  and  Nebuchadnezzar.”'1' 
Allah  knows  best. 

Allah  said, 


{Have  you  not  looked}  meaning,  “With  your  heart,  O 
Muhammad!” 

m 


At-Jabari  5 :433 . 


— _ _ _ _ _ Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 

iat  him  who  disputed  with  Ibrahim  about  his  Lord } 
meaning,  about  the  existence  of  Allah.  Nimrod  denied  the 
existence  of  a  god  other  than  himself,  as  he  claimed,  just  as 
Fir ‘awn  said  later  to  his  people, 

4- — o*  c.lir.  C} 

il  know  not  that  you  have  a  god  other  than  me }  (28:38], 

What  made  Nimrod  commit  this  transgression,  utter  disbelief 
and  arrant  rebellion  was  his  tyranny  and  the  fact  that  he 
ruled  for  a  long  time.  This  is  why  the  Ayah  continued, 

id&ii  St  L5\:  3} 


4 Because  Allah  had  given  him  the  kingdom .} 

It  appears  that  Nimrod  asked  Ibrahim  to  produce  proof  that 
Allah  exists.  Ibrahim  replied, 

4 My  Lord  is  He  Wlw  gives  life  and  causes  death} 

meaning,  “The  proof  of  Allah’s  existence  is  the  creations  that 
exist  after  they  were  nothing  and  perish  after  they  had  existed. 
This  only  proves  the  existence  of  the  Creator,  Who  does  what 
He  wills,  for  these  things  could  not  have  occurred  on  their  own 
without  a  Creator  who  created  them,  and  He  is  the  Lord  that  I 
call  to  for  worship,  Alone  without  a  partner.” 

This  is  when  Nimrod  said, 


41  give  life  and  cause  death.} 

Qatadah,  Muhammad  bin  Ishaq  and  As-Suddi  said  that  he 
meant,  “Two  men  who  deserved  execution  were  to  be  brought 
before  me,  and  I  would  command  that  one  of  them  be  killed, 
and  he  would  be  killed.  I  would  command  that  the  second 
man  be  pardoned,  and  he  would  be  pardoned.  This  is  how  I 
bring  life  and  death.”*1*  However,  it  appears  that  since  Nimrod 
did  not  deny  the  existence  of  a  Creator,  his  statement  did  not 
mean  what  Qatadah  said  it  meant.  This  explanation  does  not 
provide  an  answer  to  what  Ibrahim  said.  Nimrod  arrogantly 
and  defiantly  claimed  that  he  was  the  creator  and  pretended 

111  At-Tabari  5:433,436,437. 


that  it  was  he  who  brings  life  and  death.  Later  on,  Fir'awn 
imitated  him  and  announced, 


41  know  not  that  you  have  a  god  other  than  [28:38]. 
This  is  why  Ibrahim  said  to  Nimrod, 


St  ^  oi  o~^\ 


iVerily,  Allah  brings  the  sun  from  the  east;  then  bring  it  you 
from  the  west .4 

This  Ay  oh  means,  “You  claim  that  it  is  you  who  brings  life 
and  death.  He  who  brings  life  and  death  controls  the  existence 
and  creates  whatever  is  in  it,  including  controlling  its  planets 
and  their  movements.  For  instance,  the  sun  rises  everyday 
from  the  east.  Therefore,  if  you  were  god,  as  you  claimed, 
bringing  life  and  death,  then  bring  the  sun  from  the  west.” 
Since  the  king  was  aware  of  his  weakness,  inadequacy  and 
that  he  was  not  able  to  reply  to  Ibrahim’s  request,  he  was  idle, 
silent  and  unable  to  comment.  Therefore,  the  proof  was 
established  against  him.  Allah  said, 


4^ 


4And  Allah  guides  not  the  people,  who  are  wrongdoers > 

meaning,  Allah  deprives  the  unjust  people  of  any  valid  proof  or 
argument.  Furthermore,  their  false  proof  and  arguments  are 
annulled  by  their  Lord,  and  they  have  earned  His  anger  and 
will  suffer  severe  torment. 

The  meaning  that  we  provided  is  better  than  the  meaning 
that  some  philosophers  offered,  claiming  that  Ibrahim  used  the 
second  argument  because  it  was  clearer  than  the  first  one. 
Rather,  our  explanation  asserts  that  Ibrahim  refuted  both 
claims  of  Nimrod,  all  praise  is  due  to  Allah. 

As-Suddi  stated  that  the  debate  between  Ibrahim  and 
Nimrod  occurred  after  Ibrahim  was  thrown  in  the  fire,  for 
Ibrahim  did  not  meet  the  king  before  that  day. 


CzjS  S.  i*  i-tJ  J'i  oij  jtt  p  «»* 


&  JJ&  p  JJaS  i % 


38 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlur 


*cyr  4i  jl&;  ^\3, 


,‘S1  ^  <i'  S^  jUet  Jtt 

4259.  Or  like  the  one  who  passed  by  a  town  in  ruin  up  to  its 
roofs.  He  said:  "How  will  Allah  ever  bring  it  to  life  after  its 
death?"  So  Allah  caused  him  to  die  for  a  hundred  years,  that 
raised  him  up  (again).  He  said:  ", How  long  did  you  remain 
(dead)?”  He  (the  man)  said:  "(Perhaps)  I  remained  (dead)  a  day 
or  part  of  a  day.  He  said :  "Nay,  you  have  remained  (dead)  for 
a  hundred  years,  look  at  your  food  and  your  drink,  they  show 
no  change;  and  look  at  your  donkey!  And  thus  We  have  made 
of  you  a  sign  for  the  people.  Look  at  the  bones,  how  We  bring 
them  together  and  clothe  them  with  flesh."  When  this  was 
clearly  shown  to  him,  he  said,  "I  know  (now)  that  Allah  is  able 
to  do  all  things .  "$> 


The  Story  of  ‘Uzayr 

Allah’s  statement, 


4  c?  J!  'fo 

iHave  you  not  looked  at  him  who  disputed  with  Ibrahim  about 
his  Lord  } 

means,  Have  you  seen  anyone  like  the  person  who  disputed 
with  Ibrahim  about  his  Lord?”  Then,  Allah  connected  the 
Ayah, 


iOr  like  the  one  who  passed  by  a  town  in  ruin  up  to  its  roofs }  to  the 
Ayah  above  by  using  ‘or’. 


.  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  recorded  that  ‘Ali  bin  Abi  Talib  said  that  the 
Ayah  [2:259]  meant  ‘Uzayr J 1  ^  Ibn  Jarir ^  also  reported  it,  and 
this  explanation  was  also  reported  by  Ibn  Jarir  and  Ibn  Abi 
Hatim  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Al-Hasan,  Qatadah,  As-Suddi  and 
Sulayman  bin  Buraydah  J3' 


I1*  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3  :1009. 

Af -Tabari  5 :439 . 

131 

At-Tabari  5:439,440,  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3:1009-1010. 


39 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (Pgr£3} 

Mujahid  bin  Jabr  said  that  the  Ayah  refers  to  a  man  from 
the  Children  of  Israel,  and  the  village  was  Jerusalem,  after 
Nebuchadnezzar  destroyed  it  and  killed  its  people. 

& 

iin  ruin }  means,  it  became  empty  of  people.  Allah’s  statement, 

& 


iup  to  its  roofs }  indicates  that  the  roofs  and  walls  (of  the  village) 
fell  to  the  ground.  TJzayr  stood  contemplating  about  what  had 
happened  to  that  city,  after  a  great  civilization  used  to  inhabit 
it.  He  said, 

4^0)*  JU;  6^ 


iOh!  How  will  Allah  ever  bring  it  to  life  after  its  death?} 
because  of  the  utter  destruction  he  saw  and  the  implausibility 
of  its  returning  to  what  it  used  to  be.  Allah  said, 


4%  p  £  2U  iii  IS 


<So  Allah  caused  him  to  die  for  a  hundred  years,  then  raised 
him  up  (again).} 

The  city  was  rebuilt  seventy  years  after  the  man  (TJzayr) 
died,  and  its  inhabitants  increased  and  the  Children  of  Israel 
moved  back  to  it.  When  Allah  resurrected  TJzayr  after  he  died, 
the  first  organ  that  He  resurrected  were  his  eyes,  so  that  he 
could  witness  what  Allah  does  with  him,  how  He  brings  life 
back  to  his  body.  When  his  resurrection  was  complete,  Allah 
said  to  him,  meaning  through  the  angel, 


4/y  3'  ££  315  ob 


4 "How  long  did  you  remain  (dead)?"  He  (the  man)  said: 

"(Perhaps)  I  remained  (dead)  a  day  or  part  of  a  day.”} 

The  scholars  said  that  since  the  man  died  in  the  early  part 
of  the  day  and  Allah  resurrected  him  in  the  latter  part  of  the 
day,  when  he  saw  that  the  sun  was  still  apparent,  he  thought 
that  it  was  the  sun  of  that  very  day.  He  said, 


4"  Or  part  of  a  day."  He  said:  "Nay,  you  have  retnained  (dead) 
for  a  hundred  years,  look  at  your  food  and  your  drink,  they 


40 


Tafsir  ]bn  Kathir 

show  no  change.”} 

He  had  grapes,  figs  and  juice,  and  he  found  them  as  he  left 
them,  neither  did  the  juice  spoil  nor  the  figs  become  bitter  nor 
the  grapes  rot. 

iAnd  look  at  your  donkey!},  “How  Allah  brings  it  back  to  life 
while  you  are  watching.” 

iAnd  thus  We  have  made  of  you  a  sign  for  the  people }  that 
Resurrection  occurs* 

iLook  at  the  bones ,  how  We  Nunshizuha $ 

meaning,  collect  them  and  put  them  back  together.  In  his 
Mustadrak,  Al-Hakim,  recorded  that  Kharijah  bin  Zayd  bin 
Thabit  said  that  his  father  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  ^ 
read  this  Ayah , 

ihow  We  Nunshizuha .}  Al-Hakim  said;  “Its  chain  is  Sahih  and 
they  (Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim)  did  not  record  it.”*1'  The  Ayah 
was  also  read, 


“Nunshiruha”  meaning,  bring  them  back  to  life,  as  Mujahid 
stated.12' 

iAnd  clothe  them  with  flesh.} 

As-Suddi  said,  “  TJzayr  observed  the  bones  of  his  donkey, 
which  were  scattered  all  around  him  to  his  right  and  left,  and 
Allah  sent  a  wind  that  collected  the  bones  from  all  over  the  area. 
Allah  then  brought  every  bone  to  its  place,  until  they  formed  a 
full  donkey  made  of  fleshless  bones.  Allah  then  covered  these 
bones  with  flesh,  nerves,  veins  and  skin.  Allah  sent  an  angel 

111  Al-Hakim  2 :234 . 

,2'  At-Tabari  5:476. 


Surah  2 ,  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) 


41 


rJ)  i  i 

0  *&'  ^  pfe't)  '41’'*  ,>$£•  A>j 

^  g:  ^ 

pylori?  $  !£&?&$&.& 

J J  0»  t >Uu\  U  oyu~-?i p-> 

r^.v.  <  x/  *^r  Jf4  A  ^ 

$  !&!&&/$ 

#&^c&usMisM£[^z, 

i&b&Z 


{gyp  who  blew  life  in  the 
donkeys’  nostrils,  and 
the  donkey  started  to 
bray  by  Allah’s 
leave. ”|1’  All  this 
occurred  while  TJzayr 
was  watching,  and 
this  is  when  he 
proclaimed, 

j*  iii  it  jU*t 

4He  said,  "I  know 
(now)  that  Allah  is  able 
to  do  all  things ,”} 

meaning,  “I  know 
that,  and  I  did 
witness  it  with  my 
own  eyes.  Therefore,  I 
am  the  most 
knowledgeable  in  this 
matter  among  the 
people  of  my  time.” 

jjt  J.J  U*'j\  (J6 


<■>  •>'  •?.*  s»  -"•X  Ik-  **  •£  '  S  <rA  S*<'  V  "I.J  *■  •■*  'T''*  *A 

b\r**  jjjJ'  o2  Ju  ijl*  o-;»U  C^J  A  <3^  t>5jj  Jl*  d >J'  t/w 

ill'  J  (U&b  i£ufc  ^  tfji  JlX  y  j* 

4Hp& 


4260.  And  (remember)  when  Ibrahim  said,  "My  Lord!  Show 
me  how  You  give  life  to  the  dead."  He  (Allah)  said:  "Do  you 
not  believe?”  He  (Ibrahim)  said:  "Yes  (I  believe),  but  to  be 
stronger  in  faith."  He  said:  “ Take  four  birds,  then  cause  them 
to  incline  towards  you  (then  slaughter  them,  cut  them  into 
pieces),  and  then  put  a  portion  of  them  on  every  hill,  and  call 
them,  they  will  come  to  you  in  haste.  And  know  that  Allah  is 
All-Mighty,  All-Wise."} 


At-Tabari  5 :468 . 


[II 


Fath  Al-Bari  8 :49 . 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) 


43 


4&\ 

icause  them  to  incline  towards  you >  means,  cut  them  to  pieces. 
This  is  the  explanation  of  Ibn  ‘Abbas,  Ikrimah,  Said  bin 
Jubayr,  Abu  Malik,  Abu  Al-Aswad  Ad-Dlli,  Wahb  bin 
Munabbih,  Al-Hasan  and  As-Suddi.*1*  Therefore,  Ibrahim 
caught  four  birds,  slaughtered  them,  removed  the  feathers,  tore 
the  birds  to  pieces  and  mixed  the  pieces  together.  He  then 
placed  parts  of  these  mixed  pieces  on  four  or  seven  hills.  Ibn 
‘Abbas  said,  “Ibrahim  kept  the  heads  of  these  birds  in  his  hand. 
Next,  Allah  commanded  Ibrahim  to  ceill  the  birds  to  him,  and 
he  did  as  Allah  commanded  him.  Ibrahim  witnessed  the 
feathers,  blood  and  flesh  of  these  birds  fly  to  each  other,  eind 
the  parts  flew  each  to  their  bodies,  until  every  bird  ceime  back 
to  life  and  came  walking  at  a  fast  pace  toweirds  Ibrahim,  so  that 
the  example  that  Ibrahim  was  witnessing  would  become  more 
impressive.  Each  bird  came  to  collect  its  head  from  Ibrahim’s 
hand,  and  if  he  gave  the  bird  another  head  the  bird  refused  to 
accept  it.  When  Ibrahim  gave  each  bird  its  own  head,  the  head 
was  placed  on  its  body  by  Allah’s  leave  and  power.”*2'  This  is 
why  Allah  said, 

iAnd  know  that  Allah  is  All-Mighty,  All-Wise ) 

and  no  one  can  overwhelm  or  resist  Him.  Whatever  Allah  wills, 
occurs  without  hindrance,  because  He  is  the  All-Mighty, 
Supreme  above  all  things,  and  He  is  Wise  in  His  statements, 
actions,  legislation  and  decrees. 

‘Abdur-Razzaq  recorded  that  Ma'mar  said  that  Ayyub  said 
that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented  on  what  Ibrahim  said, 

4but  to  be  stronger  in  Faith),  “To  me,  there  is  no  Ayah  in  the 
Qur’an  that  brings  more  hope  than  this  Ayah.”*3]  Ibn  Abi 
Hatim  recorded  that  Muhammad  bin  Al-Munkadir  said  that 
‘Abdullah  bin  ‘Abbas  met  ‘Abdullah  bin  ‘Amr  bin  Al-‘As  and 

111  Ibn  Abi  yatim  3:1039,1040. 

121  Al-Qurpabi  3:300. 

131  At-Tabari  5 :489 . 


44 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


said  to  him,  “Which  Ayah  in  the  Qur’an  carries  more  hope  for 
you?”  Ibn  ‘Amr  said, 


iSay :  "O  ‘Ibddi  (My  servants)  who  have  transgressed  against 
themselves  (by  committing  evil  deeds  and  sins)!  Despair  not.) 
[39:53]. 


Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “But  I  say  that  it  is  Allah’s  statement, 

4$  <3ti  Oi?  pj  I Jy  (jJ1 


4 And  (remember)  when  Ibrahim  said,  "My  Lord!  Show  me  how 
You  give  life  to  the  dead."  He  (Allah)  said:  "Do  you  not 
believe?"  He  (Ibrahim)  said:  "Yes  (I  believe)...) 

Allah  accepted  Ibrahim’s  affirmation  when  he  merely  said, 
Yes.’  This  Ayah  refers  to  the  doubts  that  attack  the  heart  and 
the  thoughts  that  Shaytan  inspires.”1 1|  Al-Hakim  also  recorded 
this  in  Al-Mustadrak  and  said;  “Its  chain  is  Sahih  but  they  did 
not  record  it.”*2’ 


4  Sf—*  j-**  4  S^) 

4?}xf-)£  cfi  il*-  iiU 


4261 .  Tlte  parable  of  tlwse  who  spend  their  wealth  in  the  way  of 
Allah,  is  that  of  a  grain  (of  corn);  it  grows  seven  ears,  and 
each  ear  has  a  hundred  grains.  Allah  gives  manifold  increase  to 
whom  He  wills.  And  Allah  is  All-Sufficient  for  His  creatures' 
needs,  All-Knower.) 


Rewards  of  Spending  in  Allah’s  Cause 

This  is  a  parable  that  Allah  made  of  the  multiplication  of 
rewards  for  those  who  spend  in  His  cause,  seeking  His 
pleasure.  Allah  multiplies  the  good  deed  ten  to  seven  hundred 
times.  Allah  said, 

4«i'  4  OyjxL  gjjjf 


4  The  parable  of  those  who  spend  their  wealth  in  the  way  of 
Allah...) 


* 1  *  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3 : 1 032 . 
121  Al-Hakim  4:260. 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baaarah  ( Part-3 


45 


Said  bin  Jubayr  commented,  “Meaning  spending  in  Allah's 
obedience.^1*  Makhul  said  that  the  Ayah  means,  “Spending 
on  Jihad ,  on  horse  stalls,  weapons  and  so  forth. The 
parable  in  the  Ayah  is  more  impressive  on  the  heart  than 
merely  mentioning  the  number  seven  hundred.  This  Ayah 
indicates  that  Allah  ‘grows'  the  good  deeds  for  its  doers,  just 
as  He  grows  the  plant  for  whoever  sows  it  in  fertile  land.  The 
Sunnah  also  mentions  that  the  deeds  are  multiplied  up  to 
seven  hundred  folds.  For  instance,  Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that 
Abu  Maslad  said  that  a  man  once  gave  away  a  camel,  with  its 
bridle  on,  in  the  cause  of  Allah  and  the  Messenger  of  Allah  gg 
said, 

“a*  iiU  4jL ^  jj 

“On  the  Day  of  Resurrection,  you  will  have  seven  hundred 
camels  with  their  bridles 

Muslim  and  An-Nasa’i  also  recorded  this  Hadlth ,  and 
Muslim's  narration  reads,  “A  man  brought  a  camel  with  its 
bridle  on  and  said,  ‘O  Messenger  of  Allah!  This  is  in  the  sake 
of  Allah.'  The  Messenger  said, 


UOJI  fa  1*  iu» 


“Yon  will  earn  seven  hundred  camels  as  reward  for  it  on  the 
Day  of  Resurrection 

Another  Hadith :  Ahmad  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said 
that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  said, 


V|  I  fciul  *LZ 

pj  i.4jj  frlii  Ip  jlp  1  J>1 

flO»-  ^ J^a Jl  4  aL>-  4)1  jIp  ^ j \Jg] I 


*  Every  good  deed  that  the  son  of  Adam  performs  zvill  be 
multiplied  ten  folds,  to  seven  hundred  folds,  to  many  other 


^  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3  :1047. 
l2]  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3  : 1047. 

(31  Ahmad  4:121. 

^  Muslim  3  : 1505 ,  An-Nasat  6 :49 . 


46 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 

folds,  to  as  much  as  Allah  wills.  Allah  said,  "Except  the  fast, 
for  it  is  for  Me  and  I  will  reward  for  it.  One  abandons  his  food 
and  desire  in  My  sake."  The  fasting  person  has  two  times  of 
happiness:  when  he  breaks  his  fast  and  when  he  meets  his  Lord. 
Verily,  the  odor  that  comes  from  the  mouth  of  whoever  fasts  is 
more  pure  to  Allah  than  the  scent  of  musk.  Fasting  is  a  shield 
(against  sinning),  fasting  is  a  shield  V1*  Muslim  recorded 
this  Hadffh.12* 

Allah’s  statement, 

A  PZ  iSS> 


iAllah  gives  manifold  increase  to  ivhom  He  wills 
is  according  to  the  person’s  sincerity  in  his  deeds. 

iAnd  Allah  is  All-Sufficient  for  His  creatures’  needs,  All- 
Ktiower} 


meaning,  His  Favor  is  so  wide  that  it  encompasses  much  more 
than  His  creation,  and  He  has  full  knowledge  in  whoever 
deserves  it,  or  does  not  deserve  it.  All  the  praise  and  thanks 
are  due  to  Allah. 


x*  g#  #  V  P  &  ^  j  $y\  tfg  ■$)> 

fcfz,  v  \pt  CH  tfr  10 
Z\j  *S  frP  £2  ££  ^ 

iku^ 


4262.  Those  who  spend  their  wealth  in  the  cause  of  Allah,  and 
do  not  follow  up  their  gifts  with  reminders  of  their  generosity  or 
with  injury,  their  reward  is  with  their  Lord.  On  them  shall  be 
no  fear,  nor  shall  they  grieve. $ 

4263.  Kind  words  and  forgiving  of  faults  are  better  than 
Sadaqah  (charity)  followed  by  injury.  And  Allah  is  Rich  (free  of 


1,1  Ahmad  2:443. 
Muslim  2 :807 . 


47 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) _ 

all  needs)  and  He  is  Most  Forbearing.} 

4264.  O  you  who  believe!  Do  not  render  in  vain  your  Sadaqah 
(charity)  by  reminders  of  your  generosity  or  by  injury,  like  him 
ivho  spends  his  wealth  to  be  seen  of  men,  and  he  does  not 
believe  in  Allah,  nor  in  the  Last  Day.  His  likeness  is  the 
likeness  of  a  smooth  rock  on  which  is  a  little  dust;  on  it  falls 
heavy  rain  which  leaves  it  bare.  They  are  not  able  to  do 
anything  with  what  they  have  earned.  And  Allah  does  not 
guide  the  disbelieving  people .} 

To  Remind  About  Charity  Given  is  Forbidden 

Allah  praises  those  who  spend  from  their  money  in  His 
cause,  and  then  refrain  from  reminding  those  who  received  the 
charity  of  that  fact,  whether  these  hints  take  the  form  of 
words  or  actions. 

Allah’s  statement, 

4or  with  injury},  indicates  that  they  do  not  cause  harm  to  those 
whom  they  gave  the  charity  to,  for  this  harm  will  only  annul 
the  charity.  Allah  next  promised  them  the  best  rewards  for  this 
good  deed, 

ir&  **  (U#  $$ 

4 their  reward  is  with  their  Lord},  indicating  that  Allah  Himself 
will  reward  them  for  these  righteous  actions.  Further, 

iff** 

40n  them  shall  be  no  fear}  regarding  the  horrors  of  the  Day  of 
Resurrection, 

4nor  shall  they  grieve}  regarding  the  offspring  that  they  leave 
behind  and  the  adornment  and  delights  of  this  world.  They  will 
not  feel  sorry  for  this,  because  they  will  acquire  what  is  far 
better  for  them. 

Allah  then  said, 

4Kind  words}  meaning,  compassionate  words  and 


a 


48 


Tafoir  Ibn  Kathtr 


supplication  for  Muslims, 


iand  forgiving}  meaning,  forgiving  an  injustice  that  took  the 
form  of  actions  or  words, 


4are  better  than  Sadaqah  (charity)  followed  by  injury.} 

4& 


4  And  Allah  is  Rich}  not  needing  His  creation, 


iMost  Forbearing}  forgives,  releases  and  pardons  them. 


There  are  several  Hadiths  that  prohibit  reminding  people  of 
acts  of  charity.  For  instance,  Muslim  recorded  that  Abu  Dharr 
said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


%  <r4\  ’M  .udi  $  Jii  i  $S2» 
Vidl  &L  jidlj  ^30!  Jrdlj  u,  SUl 


«Three  persons  whom  Allah  shall  neither  speak  to  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection  nor  look  at  nor  purify,  and  they  shall  receive  a 
painful  torment :  he  who  reminds  (the  people)  of  what  he  gives 
away,  he  who  lengthens  his  clothes  below  the  ankles  and  he  who 
swears  an  oath  while  lying,  to  sell  his  merchandise .»*** 


This  is  why  Allah  said, 

4ts\%  fczz,  '\te  *  \pi  (S 


40  you  who  believe!  Do  not  render  in  vain  your  Sadaqah 
(charity)  by  reminders  of  your  generosity  or  by  injury} 

stating  that  the  charity  will  be  rendered  in  vain  if  it  is  followed 
by  harm  or  reminders.  In  this  case,  the  reward  of  giving  away 
charity  is  not  sufficient  enough  to  nullify  the  harm  and 
reminders.  Allah  then  said, 

4o&\  %  %  <sM} 


m 


Muslim  1  :102. 


49 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) _ _ 

like  hint  who  spends  his  xvealth  to  be  seen  of  men} 

meaning,  “Do  not  nullify  your  acts  of  charity  by  following  them 
with  reminders  and  harm,  just  like  the  charity  of  those  who 
give  it  to  show  off  to  people.”  The  boasting  person  pretends  to 
give  away  charity  for  Allah’s  sake,  but  in  reality  seeks  to  gain 
people’s  praise  and  the  reputation  of  being  kind  or  generous, 
or  other  material  gains  of  this  life.  All  the  while,  he  does  not 
think  about  Allah  or  gaining  His  pleasure  and  generous 
rewards,  and  this  is  why  Allah  said, 

h 

iand  he  does  not  believe  in  Allah,  nor  in  the  Last  Day.} 

Allah  next  set  the  example  of  whoever  gives  charity  to  show 
off.  Ad-Dahhak  commented  that  the  example  fits  one  who 
follows  his  acts  of  charity  with  reminders  or  harm.111  Allah 
said, 

io^  gZ  &£» 

iHis  likeness  is  the  likeness  of  Safwan}  where  Safwan,  from  is 
Safwanah,  meaning  the  smooth  rocks,’ 

ion  which  is  little  dust;  on  it  falls  a  Wdbil }  meaning,  heavy  rain. 


4 which  leaves  it  bare.}  This  Ayah  means  that  heavy  rain  left  the 
Safwan  completely  barren  of  dust.  Such  is  the  case  with  Allah’s 
action  regarding  the  work  of  those  who  show  off,  as  their  deeds 
are  bound  to  vanish  and  disappear,  even  though  people  think 
that  these  deeds  are  as  plentiful  as  specks  of  dust.  So  Allah 
said. 


iThey  are  not  able  to  do  anything  with  what  they  have  earned. 
And  Allah  does  not  guide  the  disbelieving  people.  } 


iJb-i 


111  At-Tabari  5:527. 


50 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kgthir 


give  away  charity  seeking  only  Allah’s  pleasure, 


U>l .  i I  £j  «I|fj  jii 

i265.  And  the  parable 
of  those  who  spend  their 
wealth  seeking  Allah's 
pleasure  while  they  in 
their  own  selves  are  sure 
and  certain  that  Allah 
will  reward  them  (for 
their  spending  in  His 
cause),  is  that  of  a  gar¬ 
den  on  a  height;  heavy 
rain  falls  on  it  and  it 
doubles  its  yield  of  har¬ 
vest.  And  if  it  does  not 
receive  heavy  rain,  light 
rain  suffices  it.  And 
Allah  is  All-Seer  (knows 
well)  of  what  you  do.} 

This  is  the  example 
of  the  believers  who 


iwhile  they  in  their  own  selves  are  sure  and  certain} 
meaning,  they  are  certain  that  Allah  shall  reward  them  for 
these  righteous  acts  with  the  best  rewards.  Similarly,  in  a 
Hadith  collected  by  Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim,  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  said,  . 

^Whoever  fasts  Ramadan  with  faith  and  expectation ...» 

meaning,  believing  that  Allah  commanded  the  fast,  all  the 
while  awaiting  His  reward  for  fasting  it.111 
m 


Fath  Al-Bari  4  :300 . 


Allah’s  statement, 


4 is  that  of  a  garden  on  a  Rabwah ^  means,  the  example  of  a  garden 
on  ‘a  height  above  the  ground’,  as  the  majority  of  scholars  have 
stated.  Ibn  ‘Abbas  and  Ad-Dahhak  added  that  it  also  has 
flowing  rivers.11’ 

Allah’s  statement, 

4& 


iWdbil  falls  on  it}  means,  heavy  rain  as  we  stated,  So  it 
produces  its, 

i&J} 


iyield  of  harvest}  meaning,  fruits  or  produce, 


4 doubles },  as  compared  to  other  gardens. 

4  &&  JixJ  '<Tr+tl  $ 

4And  if  it  does  not  receive  Wabil,  a  Tall  suffices  it.} 

Ad-Dahhak  said  that  the  ‘Tali’  is  light  rain.’2'  The  Ayah 
indicates  that  the  garden  on  the  Rabwah  is  always  fertile,  for 
if  heavy  rain  does  not  fall  on  it,  light  rain  will  suffice  for  it. 
Such  is  the  case  regarding  the  believer’s  good  deeds,  for  they 
never  become  barren.  Rather,  Allah  accepts  the  believer’s 
righteous  deeds  and  increases  them,  each  according  to  his 
deeds.  This  is  why  Allah  said  next, 

4jj-J>  ojl  «>  Cj  ’ifc} 


4And  Allah  is  All-Seer  of  what  you  do}  meaning,  none  of  His 
servants’  deeds  ever  escapes  His  perfect  watch. 


r-  .o'  #/  .  f  .  ♦  •>,  v 

»Ua>  /Jj  at 

4%6$2s  ^  <£=3  &  && 


111  At-Tabari  5:539. 
121  At-Tabari  5:539. 


52 


4266.  Would  any  of  you  wish  to  have  a  garden  with  date  palms 
and  vines,  with  rivers  flowing  underneath,  and  all  kinds  of 
fruits  for  him  therein,  while  he  is  striken  with  old  age,  and  his 
children  are  weak  (not  able  to  look  after  themselves),  then  it  is 
struck  with  a  fiery  whirlwind,  so  that  it  is  burnt?  Thus  does 
Allah  make  clear  His  Aydt  to  you  that  you  may  give  thought. ^ 


The  Example  of  Evil  Deeds  Nullifying  Good  Deeds 

Al-Bukhari  recorded  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  and  Ubayd  bin  Umayr 
said  that  Umar  bin  Al-Khattab  asked  the  Companions  of  the 
Messenger  of  Allah,  “According  to  your  opinion,  about  whom 
was  this  Ayah  revealed, 

f-iy  Ji  ji  | 

iWould  any  of  you  wish  to  have  a  garden  with  date  palms  and 
vines...?}.” 

They  said,  Allah  knows  best.”  ‘Umar  became  angry  and 
said,  “Say  we  know  or  we  do  not  know.”  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “O 
Leader  of  the  Faithful!  I  have  an  opinion  about  it.”  ‘Umar  said, 
“O  my  nephew!  Say  your  opinion  and  do  not  belittle  yourself.” 
Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “This  is  an  example  set  for  a  deed.”  Umar 
said,  “What  type  of  deed?”  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  "For  a  wealthy 
man  who  works  in  Allah’s  pleasure  and  then  Allah  sends 
Shaytan  to  him,  and  he  works  in  disobedience,  until  he 
annuls  his  good  works.”*1' 

This  Hadith  suffices  as  an  explanation  for  the  Ayah,  for  it 
explains  the  example  it  sets  by  a  person  who  does  good  first 
and  then  follows  it  with  evil,  may  Allah  save  us  from  this  end. 
So,  this  man  annulled  his  previous  good  works  with  his  latter 
evil  works.  When  he  desperately  needed  the  deeds  of  the 
former  type,  there  were  none.  This  is  why  Allah  said, 

iwhile  he  is  striken  ivith  old  age,  and  his  children  are  weak 
(not  able  to  look  after  themselves),  then  it  is  struck  with  a 
whirlwind } 

with  heavy  wind, 


m 


Fath  Al-Bari  8  :49 . 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) 


53 


ilhat  is  fieri/,  so  that  it  is  burnt}  meaning,  its  fruits  were  burnt 
and  its  trees  were  destroyed.  Therefore,  what  will  his  condition^ 
be  like? 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  recorded  that  Al-‘Awfi  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
said,  “Allah  has  set  a  good  parable,  and  all  His  parables  are 
good.  He  said, 


L*j  -J  l(~*5  J*  Jt  O’  W 


CP  iJ  %}} 


iWould  any  of  you  wish  to  have  a  garden  with  date  palms  and 
vines,  with  rivers  flowing  underneath,  and  all  kinds  of  fruits 
for  him  therein.} 

But  he  lost  all  this  in  his  old  age, 

Z&;} 


^ while  he  is  striken  with  old  age}  while  his  offspring  and  children 
are  weak  just  before  the  end  of  his  life.  Then  a  lightning  storm 
came  and  destroyed  his  garden.  Then  he  did  not  have  the 
strength  to  grow  another  garden,  nor  did  his  offspring  offer 
enough  help.  This  is  the  condition  of  the  disbeliever  on  the  Day 
of  Resurrection  when  he  returns  to  Allah,  for  he  will  not  have 
any  good  deeds  to  provide  an  excuse  -  or  refuge  -  for  him,  just 
as  the  man  in  the  parable  had  no  strength  to  replant  the 
garden.  The  disbeliever  will  not  find  anything  to  resort  to  for 
help,  just  as  the  offspring  of  the  man  in  the  parable  did  not 
provide  him  with  help.  So  he  will  be  deprived  of  his  reward 
when  he  most  needs  it,  just  as  the  man  in  the  parable  was 
deprived  of  Allah’s  garden  when  he  most  needed  it,  when  he 
became  old  and  his  offspring  weak.”’ 11 

In  his  Mustadrak,  Al-Hakim  recorded  that  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  used  to  say  in  his  supplication, 

pf  P  Pjj  (4^11 

«0  Allah!  Make  Your  biggest  provision  for  me  when  l  am  old 
in  age  and  at  the  time  my  life  ends.*12’ 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3:1074. 
121  Al-Hakim  1 :542. 


54 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 


This  is  why  Allah  said, 

iSjjZZ  ft  &  ■£  4&} 


iThus  Allah  makes  clear  to  you  His  Laws  in  order  that  you 
may  give  thought ^ 


meaning,  comprehend  and  understand  the  parables  and  their 
intended  implications.  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


■’  CjJiij} 


iAnd  these  similitudes  We  put  forward  for  mankind;  but  none 
will  understand  them  except  tlwse  who  have  knowledge  (of 
Allah  and  His  signs)}  [29:43]. 


Jfsi f  £  ft  U  Yp:  u$\  *$£} 

iit  [»■<*» *»  0^  *>■&%  ii»  iSaiiit 


ftp  &}  ftftj  3®  ftp  &&  _ 


<267.  O  you  who  believe!  Spend  of  the  good  things  which  you 
have  (legally)  earned,  and  of  that  which  We  have  produced  from 
the  earth  for  you,  and  do  not  aim  at  that  which  is  bad  to  spend 
from  it,  (though)  you  would  not  accept  it  save  if  you  close  your 
eyes  and  tolerate  therein.  And  know  that  Allah  is  Rich  (free  of 
all  needs),  and  worthy  of  all  praise.} 

i268.  Shay  tan  threatens  you  with  poverty  and  orders  you  to 
commit  Fahshd'  (evil  deeds)  whereas  Allah  promises  you 
forgiveness  from  Himself  and  bounty,  and  Allah  is  All- 
Sufficient  for  His  creatures'  needs,  All-Knower.} 

42 69.  He  grants  Hikmah  to  whom  He  wills,  and  he,  to  whom 
Hikmah  is  granted,  is  indeed  granted  abundant  good.  But  none 
remember  (will  receive  admonition)  except  men  of 
understanding.} 


The  Encouragement  to  Spend  Honest  Money  for  Allah's 
Sake 

Allah  commands  His  believing  servants  to  spend  in  charity, 
as  Ibn  ‘Abbas  stated,  from  the  pure,  honest  money  that  they 


Surah  2 .  Al-Bagaralt  (Part-3 


55 


earned  and  from  the  fruits  and  vegetables  that  He  has  grown 
for  them  in  the  land.  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Allah  commanded  them 
to  spend  from  the  purest,  finest  and  best  types  of  their  money 
and  prohibited  spending  from  evil  and  dishonest  money, 
because  Allah  is  pure  and  good  and  only  accepts  that  which  is 
pure  and  good.”  This  is  why  Allah  said, 

iand  do  not  aim  at  that  which  is  bad }  meaning,  filthy  (impure) 
money, 

*4^ 


4  to  spend  from  it,  (though)  you  would  not  accept  it} 

meaning,  “If  you  were  given  this  type,  you  would  not  take  it, 
except  if  you  tolerate  the  deficiency  in  it.  Verily,  Allah  is  far 
Richer  than  you,  He  is  in  no  need  of  this  money,  so  do  not 
give,  for  His  sake,  what  you  would  dislike  for  yourselves.”  It 
was  reported  that, 


Ik 


iand  do  not  aim  at  that  which  is  bad  to  spend  from  it} 

means,  “Do  not  spend  from  the  dishonest,  impure  money 
instead  of  the  honest,  pure  money.” 

Ibn  Jarir  recorded  that  Al-Bara’  bin  ‘Azib  commented  on 
Allah’s  statement. 


%  f  £  fa  CL.J  U  *££  o-  t£C  ejf  <*&} 


iO  you  who  believe!  Spend  of  the  good  things  which  you  have 
(legally)  earned,  and  of  that  which  We  have  produced  from  the 
earth  for  you,  and  do  not  aim  at  that  which  is  bad  to  spend 
from  it,} 

that  it  was  revealed  about  the  Ansar.  When  the  season  for 
harvesting  date-trees  would  start,  the  Ansar  would  collect  ripe- 
date  branches  from  their  gardens  and  hang  them  on  a  rope 
erected  between  two  pillars  in  the  Masjid  of  the  Messenger  of 
Allah.  The  poor  emigrant  Companions  would  eat  from  these 
dates.  However,  some  of  them  (Ansar)  would  also  add  lesser 
type  of  dates  in  between  ripe-date  branches,  thinking  they  are 


56 - Tafsir  Ibn  Kafhir 

allowed  to  do  so.  Allah  revealed  this  Ayah  about  those  who  did 
this, 


iand  do  not  aim  at  that  which  is  bad  to  spend  from  it.)111 

‘Ali  bin  Abi  Talhah  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  commented  on  the 
Ayah, 

ii~i  jl  'yi  £jj) 

iyou  would  not  accept  it  save  if  you  close  your  eyes  and 
tolerate  therein) 

means,  “If  you  had  a  right  on  someone  who  would  pay  you 
less  than  what  you  gave  them,  you  would  not  agree  until  you 
require  more  from  them  to  make  up  the  difference.  This  is  why 
Allah  said, 

/t  >  ^  \ 


isave  if  you  close  your  eyes  and  tolerate  therein) 


meaning,  ‘How  do  you  agree  for  Me  what  you  do  not  agree  for 
yourselves,  while  I  have  a  right  to  the  best  and  most  precious 
of  your  possessions?”  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  and  Ibn  Jarir  recorded 
this  Hadith  and  Ibn  Jarir  added,  “And  this  is  the  meaning  of 
Allah’s  statement, 


4By  no  means  shall  you  attain  Al-Birr,  unless  you  spend  of 
that  which  you  love)”  [4:92]|2) 

Allah  said  next, 

%  &  %  ££$► 


4 And  know  that  Allah  is  Rich  (free  of  all  needs),  and  worthy  of 
all  praise) 

meaning,  “Although  Allah  commanded  you  to  give  away  the 
purest  of  your  money  in  charity.  He  is  far  Richer  from  needing 
your  charity,  but  the  purpose  is  that  the  distance  between  the 
rich  and  the  poor  becomes  less.”  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


At-Tabari  5:559. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3 : 1088,  At-Tabari  5 :565. 


ip,  %  I vji.  &  jc 


ill  is  neither  their  meat  nor  their  blood  that  reaches  Allah,  but 
it  is  piety  from  you  that  reaches  Him }  [22:37], 

Allah  is  Rich  and  free  of  needing  anything  from  any  of  His 
creatures,  while  all  of  His  creatures  stand  in  need  of  Him. 
Allah  s  bounty  encompassing,  and  what  He  has  never  ends. 
Therefore,  whoever  gives  away  good  and  pure  things  in  charity, 
let  him  know  that  Allah  is  the  Most  Rich,  His  favor  is 
enormous  and  He  is  Most  Generous,  Most  Compassionate;  and 
He  shall  reward  him  for  his  charity  and  multiply  it  many 
times.  So  who  would  lend  to  He  Who  is  neither  poor  nor 
unjust,  Who  is  worthy  of  all  praise  in  all  His  actions, 
statements,  and  decisions,  of  Whom  there  is  neither  a  deity 
worthy  of  worship  except  Him,  nor  a  Lord  other  than  Him? 


Shaytanic  Doubts  Concerning  Spending  in  Charity 

Allah  said, 


iShaytan  threatens  you  with  poverty  and  orders  you  to  commit 
Faltslta' ;  whereas  Allah  promises  you  forgiveness  from  Himself 
and  bounty,  and  Allah  is  All-Sufficient  for  His  creatures’ 
needs,  All-Knower.} 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  recorded  that  ‘Abdullah  bin  Mas  “ad  said  that 
the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said. 


4-^3  jtkiji  lli  uti  »Uj  4iuij j  4^1  Uj  jiklu  lu 


i’  <•  4tO  *1}  \i\  j  ijAJL 

ajUallll  j*  iyilXt  4<)|  , i A.'.U  4<ii|  y, 


11 Shaytan  has  an  effect  on  the  son  of  Adam,  and  the  angel  also 
has  an  effect.  As  for  the  effect  of  Shaytan,  it  is  by  his 
threatening  ivith  evil  repercussions  and  rejecting  the  truth.  As 
for  the  effect  of  the  angel,  it  is  by  his  promise  of  a  good  end  and 
believing  in  the  truth.  Whoever  finds  the  latter,  let  him  know 
that  it  is  coming  from  Allah  and  let  him  thank  Allah  for  it. 
Whoever  finds  the  former,  let  him  seek  refuge  -  with  Allah  - 


58 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


from  Shay  tan. » 

The  Prophet  then  recited, 


iShaytdn  threatens  you  with  poverty  and  orders  you  to  commit 
Fahshd';  whereas  Allah  promises  you  forgiveness  from  Himself 
and  bounty 

This  is  the  narration  that  At-Tirmidhi  and  An-Nasal  collected 
m  the  book  of  Tafsir  in  their  Sunan  collections. 121 
Allah  said, 

in '  p* 


iShaytdn  threatens  you  with  poverty }►,  so  that  you  hold  on  to 
whatever  you  have  and  refrain  from  spending  it  in  Allah’s 
pleasure. 


4And  orders  you  to  commit  Faltshd >,  meaning,  “Shaytan  forbids 
vou  from  spending  in  charity  because  of  the  false  fear  of 
becoming  poor,  and  he  encourages  evil  deeds,  sins,  indulging  in 
•.vhat  is  prohibited,  and  immoral  conduct."  Allah  said, 


iWhereas  Allah  promises  you  forgiveness  from  Himselfo  instead  of 
ie  evil  that  Shaytan  enjoins  on  you, 

i‘y 


\nd  Bounty ^  as  opposed  to  the  poverty  that  Shaytan  frightens 
you  with, 


4And  Allah  is  All-Sufficient  for  His  creatures'  needs,  All- 
Knower.i 

'he  Meaning  of  Al-Hikmah 

\llah  said, 

4*^4  o* 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3 : 1090 . 

!  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8  :332 ,  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  6 :305 . 


59 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (Part-1) 


J 


^  gjggu 

-f  , - i?  ,•?  r  <  ^4- 
fr\<r4«jJ  \  LAjJj-Jj  UyL>tj  Ojj  C-ldJL^Ji 

_ -jl*  ^  ^  ✓>< 


*<  -  f  't  . 


• - p-*  Jj  >  jl*g" - »>*-  j/ J  (V-^J 


\,<f*  grants  Hikmah  to 
whom  He  wills.} 

‘Ali  bin  Abi  Jalhah 
reported  that  Ibn 
‘Abbas  said,  “That  is 
knowledge  of  the 
Qur’an.  For  instance, 
the  abrogating  and  the 
abrogated,  what  is 
plain  and  clear  and 
what  is  not  as  plain 
and  clear,  what  it 
allows,  and  what  it 
does  not  allow,  and  its 
parables. ”,1)  Imam 
Ahmad  recorded  that 
Ibn  Mas*ud  said  that  he 
heard  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  jg  saying, 

&  J  ^  jL£  v* 

^js-  iklli  VU  ibl  Jtl 

*  J+'jj  ijiii  ^ 

^  ^  £  Ls± 


“ There  is  no  envy  except  in  two  instances:  a  person  whom 
Allah  has  endowed  with  wealth  and  he  spends  it  righteously, 
and  a  person  whom  Allah  has  given  Hikmah  and  he  judges  by 
it  and  teaches  it  to  others 

This  was  also  collected  by  Al-Bukhari,  Muslim,  An-Nasa’i 
Ibn  Majah.13* 

Allah’s  statement, 


5t  ijSji  ~4\  % 


% 


iBut  none  remember  (will  receive  admonition)  except  men  of 

111  At-Tabari  5:576. 

,2)  Ahmad  1  :432 . 

Fath.  Al-Bari  1 :199,  Muslim  1 :559,  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  3:426 
Ibn  Majah  2  :1407. 


60 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


understanding.} 

means,  “Those  who  will  benefit  from  the  advice  are  those  who 
have  sound  minds  and  good  comprehension  with  which  they 
understand  the  words  (of  advice  and  reminder)  and  their 
implications.” 


%  '&  &  >,  ^-4 

'■‘■i  ^  os  r^==<^  |^=o 


<270.  And  whatever  you  spend  for  spendings  (e.g.,  in 
Sadaqah)  or  whatever  vow  you  make,  be  sure  Allah  knows  it 
all.  And  for  the  wrongdoers  there  are  no  helpers.} 

4271.  If  you  disclose  your  Sadaqat  (ahnsgiving) ,  it  is  well;  but 
if  you  conceal  them  and  give  them  to  the  poor,  that  is  better  for 
you.  (Allah)  will  expiate  you  some  of  your  sins.  And  Allah  is 
Well-Acquainted  with  what  you  do.} 

Allah  states  that  He  has  perfect  knowledge  of  the  good  deeds 
performed  by  all  of  His  creation,  such  as  charity  and  various 
vows,  and  He  rewards  tremendously  for  these  deeds,  provided 
they  are  performed  seeking  His  Face  and  His  promise.  Allah 
also  warns  those  who  do  not  work  in  his  obedience,  but 
instead  disobey  His  command,  reject  His  revelation  and 
worship  others  besides  Him: 


4 And  for  the  wrongdoers  there  are  no  helpers.} 
meaning,  who  will  save  them  from  Allah’s  anger  and  torment 
on  the  Day  of  Resurrection. 

The  Virtue  of  Disclosing  or  Concealing  Charity 

Allah  said, 

4j ► 


4If  you  disclose  your  Sadaqat,  it  is  well}  meaning,  “It  is  well  if  you 
make  known  the  charity  that  you  give  away.” 

Allah’s  statement, 


jt  J43  ol>y 


4But  if  you  conceal  them  and  give  tltem  to  the  poor,  that  is 


better  for  you 

this  indicates  that  concealing  charity  is  better  than  disclosing 
it,  because  it  protects  one  from  showing  off  and  boasting. 
However,  if  there  is  an  apparent  wisdom  behind  disclosing  the 
charity,  such  as  the  people  imitating  this  righteous  act,  then 
disclosing  it  becomes  better  than  concealing  it.  The  Messenger 
of  Allah  said, 

«He  who  utters  aloud  Quranic  recitation  is  just  like  he  who 
discloses  charity  acts.  He  who  conceals  Qur'dnic  recitation  is 
just  like  he  who  conceals  charity  acts .  1 1 

The  Ayah  indicates  that  it  is  better  that  acts  of  charity  be 
concealed,  as  reiterated  by  the  Hadlth  that  the  Two  Sahths 
recorded  from  Abu  Hurayrah  that  the  Messenger  of  Aliah  jg 
said, 


J  &  4-^3  fUj  yi  v  j  Uj., 

”4*  Je-jj  U«>l  1 4il  liUj  o'jJrj'j  1 4(1 

«.«££  Qu  4)1  J> 

'r'J  4»l  oU-l  :  jlii  ijLLi-j  olj  ;i^Ji 

**"S54  iji*  ta  4l*-i  j»li;  V  4  UlLi-U  OJuk,  j j_aJ  jfjj 


will  give  shade  to  seven  on  the  Day  when  there  will  be 
no  shade  but  His.  (They  are:)  a  just  ruler,  a  youth  who  has 
been  brought  up  in  the  worship  of  Allah,  two  persons  who  love 
each  other  only  for  Allah's  sake  who  meet  and  part  in  Allah’s 
cause  only,  a  man  whose  heart  is  attached  to  the  Masjids  from 
the  time  he  departs  the  Masjid  until  he  returns  to  it,  a  person 
who  remembers  Allah  in  seclusion  and  his  eyes  are  then  flooded 
with  tears,  a  man  who  refuses  the  call  of  a  chartning  woman  of 
noble  birth  for  illicit  intercourse  with  her  and  says,  7  fear 
Allah,  Lord  of  the  worlds',  and  a  man  who  gives  charitable  gifs 
so  secretly  that  his  left  hand  does  not  know  what  his  right  hand 
has  given  V2' 


111  Abu  Dawud  2:83. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  3 :344 ,  Muslim  2:715. 


62 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Allah’s  statement, 


Ji  J&ib 


i(Allah)  will  expiate  you  some  of  your  sins >  means,  in  return  for 
giving  away  charity,  especially  if  it  was  concealed.  Therefore, 
you  will  gain  goodness  by  your  rank  being  raised,  and  your  sins 
being  forgiven. 

Allah’s  statement, 


i’%.  q  %)> 


iAnd  Allah  is  Well-Acquainted  with  what  you  do)  means,  “No  good 
deed  that  you  perform  escapes  His  knowledge,  and  He  shall 
reward  for  it.” 


„  *'  Jilt  *  >,  '  * 

jy-  j*  \yu^>  L.j  « — J  4»l  ^ 

u  u;  $  '%j4  ^  G 

v  O  ^  £LS»  #£*38  * 

^  w*Vf 

s^jLjuJ  2§£>-^  •>>  ill'  _xi  jyil.j  Yj  s^j-UK 

Yj  >  ^  - — *>-  Yj  i>-^5 


4272.  Nof  upon  you  (Muhammad  jfc)  is  their  guidance,  but 
Allah  guides  whom  He  wills .  And  whatever  you  spend  in  good, 
it  is  for  yourselves,  when  you  spend  not  except  seeking  Allah's 
Face.  And  whatever  you  spend  in  good,  it  will  be  repaid  to  you 
in  full,  and  you  shall  not  be  wronged.) 

4273.  (Charity  is)  for  Fuqard'  (the  poor),  who  in  Allah's  cause 
are  restricted  (from  travel),  and  cannot  move  about  in  the  land 
(for  trade  or  work).  The  one  who  knows  them  not,  thinks  that 
they  are  rich  because  of  their  modesty.  You  may  know  them  by 
their  mark,  they  do  not  beg  of  people  at  all.  And  whatever  you 
spend  in  good,  surely  Allah  knows  it  well.) 

4274.  Those  who  spend  their  wealth  (in  Allah's  cause)  by  night 
and  day,  in  secret  and  in  public,  they  shall  have  their  reward 
with  their  Lord.  On  them  shall  be  tw  fear,  nor  shall  they 
grieve.) 


Suroft  2.  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3} 


63 


Giving  Charity  to  Polytheists 


Abu  ‘Abdur-Rahman  An-Nasal  recorded  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said 
that  they,  “Disliked  giving  charity  to  their  polytheist  relatives, 
but  were  later  on  allowed  to  give  it  to  them  when  they 
inquired  about  this  matter,  and  this  Ayah  was  revealed, 


4  ><£.££5 


upon  you  (Muhammad  is  their  guidance,  but  Allah 
guides  whom  He  wills.  And  ivhatever  you  spend  in  good,  it  is 
for  yourselves,  when  you  spend  not  except  seeking  Allah's  Face. 
And  whatever  you  spend  in  good,  it  zvill  be  repaid  to  you  in 
full,  and  you  shall  not  be  zoronged .^'1 


Allah’s  statement, 


iAnd  zvhatever  you  spend  in  good,  it  is  for  yourselves > 
is  similar  to  His  other  statement, 

UU<»  ^ 


iWhosoevcr  does  righteous  good  deed,  it  is  for  (the  benefit  of) 
his  cnonself.  ^ 

There  axe  many  other  similar  Ayat  in  the  Qur’an. 

Allah  said  next, 


4When  you  spend  not  except  seeking  Allah’s  Face.} 

Al-Hasan  Al-Basri  commented,  “Whenever  the  believer 
spends,  including  what  he  spends  on  himself,  he  seeks  Allah’s 
Face  with  it.”  ‘Ata’  Al-Khurasani  said  that  the  Ayah  means, 
“You  give  away  charity  for  the  sake  of  Allah.  Therefore,  you 
will  not  be  asked  about  the  deeds  [or  wickedness]  of  those  who 
receive  it.’  This  is  a  sound  meaning  indicating  that  when 
one  spends  in  charity  for  Allah’s  sake,  then  his  reward  will  be 

An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  6:305. 

121  Ibn  Abi  H&tim  3:1115. 

131  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3:1115. 


64 


Tafsir  1 bn  Kathir 


with  Allah.  He  will  not  be  asked  if  the  charity  unintentionally 
reached  righteous,  evil,  deserving  or  undeserving  persons,  for 
he  will  be  rewarded  for  his  good  intention.  The  proof  to  this 
statement  is  the  Ayah, 


iAtid  whatever  you  spend  in  good,  it  will  be  repaid  to  you  in 
full,  and  you  shall  not  be  wronged .> 

The  Two  Sahihs  recorded  a  Hadith  by  Abu  Hurayrah  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  sg  jg  said, 

i*  +  *  *  *  *  *  +  *  *  ^  5  ^  ^  ^  x* 

<LJJi  Jw* 

iJjlj  juAJI  iiiJ  •  Jtfli 
jljJ  IUjJjlAS  ‘uc*’  •£  j1.  f?-^.  fy** 

4A»jLi,  aJqji  yxi jV  a!>ji  liiJ  p-flji  :  ju  '■li?  y* 

iOJl  JjJij  :  j ,_*? 

J-2i  .  JjU-  ‘iS'j  .jl*-  '•tU 

JJJj  ,tA^j  L^j  .  ‘  "  jl  l^Jbb  ol^ll  blj  i  C-l-i  Ojj  vlbjJ?  bi  .  d 

icj p  IJ,  ■  jl  jjlL'l  JJUj  kiilt  olLi i  tl<  jii  *-r*d 


uA  man  said,  " Tonight ,  I  shall  give  charity."  He  went  out 
with  his  charity  and  (unknowingly)  gave  it  to  an  adulteress. 
The  next  morning  the  people  said  that  alms  were  given  to  an 
adulteress.  The  nwn  said,  "O  Allah!  All  the  praises  are  for 
You.  (I  gave  my  alms)  to  an  adulteress.  Tonight,  I  shall  give 
alms  again."  He  went  out  with  his  charity  and  (unknowingly) 
gave  it  to  a  rich  person.  The  next  morning  (the  people)  said, 
" Last  night,  a  wealthy  person  was  given  alms."  He  said,  "O 
Allah!  All  the  praises  are  for  You.  (I  gave  alms)  to  a  wealthy 
man.  Tonight,  I  shall  again  give  charity."  So  he  ivent  out  with 
his  charity  and  (unknowingly)  gave  it  to  a  thief.  The  next 
morning  (the  people)  said,  " Last  night,  a  thief  was  given 
alms."  He  said,  " O  Allah!  All  the  praises  are  for  You.  (I  have 
given  alms)  to  an  adulteress,  a  wealthy  man  and  a  thief." 
Then,  someone  came  to  him  and  said,  "The  alms  that  you  gave 
away  were  accepted.  As  for  the  adulteress,  the  alms  might  make 
her  abstain  from  adultery.  As  for  the  wealthy  man,  it  might 


make  him  take  a  lesson  and  spend  his  ivealth  that  Allah  has 
given  him.  As  for  the  thief,  it  might  make  him  abstain  from 
stealing .  "»* 1  * 

Who  Deserves  Charity 

Allah  said, 

i#  O 

i(Charity  is)  for  the  poor,  zoho  in  Allah’s  cause  are  restricted 
(from  travel)} 

meaning,  the  migrants  who  migrated  to  Allah  and  His 
Messenger,  resided  in  Al-Madlnah  and  did  not  have  resources 
that  sufficiently  provided  them  with  their  needs, 

4'— _ _ i  -i} 

iAnd  cannot  Durban  (move  about)  in  the  land} 

meaning,  “They  cannot  travel  in  the  land  to  seek  means  of 
livelihood.”  Allah  said  in  other  instances  [using  a  variation  of 
the  word  Darban ) 

J  4  'f£> 

iAnd  when  you  (Muslims)  travel  in  the  land,  there  is  no  sin 
on  you  if  you  shorten  the  Saldlt  (the  prayer)}  [4:101],  and, 

4He  knows  that  there  will  be  some  among  you  sick ,  others 
traveling  through  the  land ,  sating  of  Allah's  bounty ,  yef  others 
fighting  in  Allah's  cause }  [73:20]. 

Allah  then  said, 

iThe  one  who  knows  them  not,  thinks  that  they  are  rich 
because  of  their  modesty} 

meaning,  those  who  do  not  know  their  situation  think  that 
they  are  well-off,  because  they  are  modest  in  their  clothes  and 


Fath  Al-Bari  3 :340 ,  Muslim  2 :709 . 


66 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


speech.  There  is  a  Hadith  with  this  meaning  that  the  Two 
SafyOjs  recorded  from  Abu  Hurayrah  that  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  jg  said, 


iJ  ^LL;  i*;  i  jjj\  j£Mi\  jA;,  SWij 

•lilt  ,>&i  jU:  v'3  ^4* 


«The  Miskitt  (needy)  is  not  he  who  wanders  about  and  whose 
need  is  sufficed  by  a  date  or  two,  a  bite  or  hvo  or  a  meal  or 
two.  Rather,  the  Miskin  is  he  who  neither  has  enough  resources 
to  sustain  him,  all  the  while  people  are  unaware  of  his  need  $0 
they  do  not  give  to  him,  nor  does  he  ask  people  for 
anything .s’1' 

Imam  Ahmad  also  recorded  this  Hadith  from  Ibn  MasMd.121 
Allah’s  statement, 

iYou  may  know  them  by  their  mark}  means,  “Those  who  have 
good  minds  discover  their  situation,”  just  as  Allah  said  in  other 
instances, 

iThe  mark  of  them  (i.e.  of  their  faith)  is  on  their  faces} 
(48:29),  and, 


si 

iBut  surely,  you  will  know  them  by  the  tone  of  their  speech!} 
[47:30]. 

Allah’s  statement, 

^} 

ithey  do  not  beg  of  people  at  all}  means,  they  do  not  beg  and, 
thus,  do  not  require  people  to  provide  them  with  more  than 
what  they  actually  need.  Indeed,  those  who  ask  people  for  help, 
while  having  what  suffices  for  their  needs,  have  begged. 

111  FathAl-Bari  3:399. 

121  Ahmad  1 :384. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  ( Part-3 ) 


67 


Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Abu  Said  said,  “My  mother  sent 
me  to  the  Messenger  of  Allah  ^  to  ask  him  for  help,  but  when 
I  came  by  him  I  sat  down.  The  Prophet  faced  me  and  said  to 
me, 


jLl  i<I>l  o US' 


fyj  nil  olli-I 

Jii  aJjI 


1 


‘Whoever  felt  satisfied,  then  Allah  will  enrich  him.  Whoever  is 
modest,  Allah  will  make  him  decent.  Whoever  is  content,  then 
Allah  will  suffice  for  him.  Whoever  asks  people,  while  having  a 
small  amout,  he  will  have  begged  the  people .» 

Abu  Said  said,  “I  said  to  myself,  1  have  a  camel,  Al-Yaqutah, 
and  indeed,  it  is  worth  more  than  a  small  amount.’  And  I  went 
back  without  asking  the  Prophet  $g  for  anything.”111  This  is  the 
same  wording  for  this  Hadlth  collected  by  Abu  Dawud  and  An- 
Nasa’i.121 

Allah’s  statement, 

iAnd  whatever  you  spend  in  good,  surely  Allah  knows  it  well} 

indicates  that  no  charity  escapes  Him,  and  He  will  reward  it 
fully  and  perfectly  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection,  when  it  is  most 
desperately  needed. 


Praise  for  those  who  Spend  in  Charity 

Allah  said, 


r#  **  ^  fcfcss  6-? 


{Those  who  spend  their  wealth  (in  Allah's  cause)  by  night  and 
day,  in  secret  and  in  public,  they  shall  have  their  reward  with 
their  Lord.  On  them  shall  be  no  fear,  nor  shall  they  grieve .} 

This  Ayah  praises  those  who  spend  in  charity  for  Allah’s 
sake,  seeking  His  pleasure,  day  and  night,  publicly  and  in 
secret,  including  what  one  spends  on  his  family.  The  Two 


111  Ahmad  3 :9. 

121  Abu  Dawud  2  :279,  An-Nasal  5  :95. 


68 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Sahihs  recorded  that 
the  Messenger  of 
Allah  jjg  said  to  Sa‘d 
bin  Abi  Waqqas: 

Lfc  jib  j}  iiip* 

iJr'js  1$;  oiajl  Vl  4)1  *Jrj 

«Yow  u»i//  nof  spend 
charity  ivith  which  you 
seek  Allah's  Face,  but 
you  will  ascend  a  higher 
degree  and  status  be¬ 
cause  of  it,  including 
what  you  put  in  your 
wife's  mouth.^ 

Imam  Alimad 
recorded  that  Abu 
Mas*ud  said  that  the 
Prophet  said, 

jiii  lit  '(xJS\  !>!» 

niiJui  i)  OJ15  i  t  >J  <ui< 

« When  the  Muslim  spends  on  his  family  while  awaiting  the 
reward  for  it  from  Allalt,  it  will  be  written  as  charity  for 
him.* 121 

Al-Bukhari  and  Muslim  also  recorded  this  Hadith)^ 

Allah  said, 

x*  $3  fo} 

ishall  have,  their  reward  with  their  Lord},  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection,  as  reward  for  what  they  spent  in  acts  of 

111  Path  Al-B&ri  3 :196,  Muslim  4 :1250. 

121  Ahmad  4:122. 

■3|  Fath  Al-Bari  1 :55 ,  Muslim  2 :695 . 


1££is&ik 

/./  .  -f.  >>  '"k'V  **  * 

!£Ai<£e#Sl 

ii J6\  \puk*$<ik  0 

i fCfu  jy  of  ^  '  S ’3j 

</»j  fo=&  'tfo  fo  *  ifojj  <ii  Si  ^ 

1. .  •  /  >'.V.rt4*fr:  ^4 


.  /  >  /  ^ >  sf''  r',  1 

^  ^  A'-.  ;  V’-.t 


69 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) _ 

obedience.  We  previously  explained  the  Ayah, 

^ 


ithere  shall  be  no  Jear  on  them  nor  shall  they  grieve. $ 

m  s*  sis*  a  ^  &&  -i  igjf  sjLU; 

}&T  J~*  'vjQ's  f>»-J  ji* 

^  r*  $  vij, 

4  r'° 


yki- 


4275.  Those  who  eat  Riba  will  not  stand  (on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection)  except  like  the  standing  of  a  person  beaten  by 
Shay  tan  leading  him  to  insanity.  That  is  because  they  say: 
" Trading  is  only  like  Riba,”  ivhereas  Allah  has  permitted 
trading  and  forbidden  Riba.  So  whosoever  receives  an 
admonition  from  his  Lord  and  stops  eating  Riba,  shall  not  be 
punished  far  the  past;  his  case  is  far  Allah  (to  judge);  but 
whoever  returns  (to  Riba),  such  are  the  dwellers  of  the  Fire  - 
they  will  Abide  therein.} 


The  Punishment  for  Dealing  with  Riba  (Interest  and 
Usury) 


After  Allah  mentioned  the  righteous  believers  who  give 
charity,  pay  Zakah  and  spend  on  their  relatives  and  families  at 
various  times  and  conditions,  He  then  mentioned  those  who 
deal  in  usury  and  illegally  acquire  people’s  money,  using 
various  evil  methods  and  wicked  ways.  Allah  describes  the 
condition  of  these  people  when  they  are  resurrected  from  their 
graves  and  brought  back  to  life  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection: 


fez  <2  ^  &&  -i  l>>*  IfLk 


iThose  who  eat  Riba  will  not  stand  (on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection)  except  like  the  standing  of  a  person  beaten  by 
Shay  tan  leading  him  to  insanity .} 

This  Ayah  means,  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection,  these  people 
will  get  up  from  their  graves  just  as  the  person  afflicted  by 
insanity  or  possesed  by  a  demon  would.  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “On 
the  Day  of  Resurrection,  those  who  consume  Riba  will  be 


70 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


resurrected  while  insane  and  suffering  from  seizures.”111  Ibn 
Abi  Hatim  also  recorded  this  and  then  commented,  “This 
Tafsir  was  reported  from  ‘Awf  bin  Malik,  Said  bin  Jubayr,  As- 
Suddi,  Ar-Rabr  bin  Anas,  Qatadah  and  Muqatil  bin 
Hayyan.”*21  Al-Bukhari  recorded  that  Samurah  bin  Jundub 
said  in  the  long  Hadith  about  the  dream  that  the  Prophet  jg 
had, 


JjUi  lilj  cjls-  oi  b.*  1_JU  li|j  i 

eli  J  icip  S^UuhJI  Ji  vllJi  Li  £jUL)I 


«We  reached  a  river  -the  narrator  said,  "I  thought  he  said  that 
the  river  was  as  red  as  blood”-  and  found  that  a  man  was 
swimming  in  the  river,  and  on  its  bank  there  was  another  man 
standing  with  a  large  collection  of  stones  next  to  him .  The  man 
in  the  river  would  swim,  then  come  to  the  man  who  had 
collected  the  stones  and  open  his  mouth,  and  the  other  man 
would  throw  a  stone  in  his  mouth.* 


The  explanation  of  this  dream  was  that  the  person  in  the 
river  was  one  who  consumed  RibaP * 

Allah’s  statement, 


ff-J  «*•'  \ji)\  ji. 


iThat  is  because  they  say:  " Trading  is  only  like  Riba,"  lohereas 
Allah  has  permitted  trading  and  forbidden  Riba} 

indicates  that  the  disbelievers  claimed  that  Riba  was  allowed 
due  to  the  fact  that  they  rejected  Allah’s  commandments,  not 
that  they  equated  Riba  with  regular  trade.  The  disbelievers  did 
not  recognize  that  Allah  allowed  trade  in  the  Qur’an,  for  if  they 
did,  they  would  have  said,  “ Riba  is  trade.”  Rather,  they  said, 

4*0  &  £«» 


4 Trading  is  only  like  Riba }  meaning,  they  are  similar,  so  why  did 


At-Tabari  6:9. 

,21  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3:1 130,1 131. 
131  FathAl-Bdri  3:295. 


71 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) 


Allah  allow  this,  but  did  not  allow  that,  they  asked  in  defiance 
of  Allah’s  commandments. 

Allah’s  statement, 

2>t  ffi}} 


^Hftereas  Allah  has  permitted  trading  and  forbidden  Riba} 

might  be  a  continuation  of  the  answer  to  the  disbelievers’ 
claim,  who  uttered  it,  although  they  knew  that  Allah  decided 
that  ruling  on  trade  is  different  from  that  of  Riba.  Indeed, 
Allah  is  the  Most  Knowledgeable,  Most  Wise,  Whose  decision  is 
never  resisted.  Allah  is  never  asked  about  what  He  does,  while 
they  will  be  asked.  He  is  knowledgeable  of  the  true  reality  of 
all  things  and  the  benefits  they  cany.  He  knows  what  benefits 
His  servants,  so  He  allows  it  for  them,  and  what  harms  them, 
so  He  forbids  them  from  it.  He  is  more  merciful  with  them 
than  the  mother  with  her  own  infant. 

Thereafter,  Allah  said, 


4“A\  h  ± 


iSo  whosoever  receives  an  admonition  from  his  Lord  and  stops 
eating  Riba,  shall  not  be  punished  for  the  past;  his  case  is  far 
Allah  (to  judge),} 

meaning,  those  who  have  knowledge  that  Allah  made  usury 
unlawful,  and  refrain  from  indulging  in  it  as  soon  as  they 
acquire  this  knowledge,  then  Allah  will  forgive  their  previous 
dealings  in  Riba, 

Cf  lit 


i Allah  has  forgiven  what  is  past.} 

On  the  day  Makkah  was  conquered  the  Prophet  said, 

Uj  Cj  Jji)  *  jllli  £lj>  cJj  Jt  t.j  fej1 


a All  cases  of  Riba  during  the  time  of  jdhiliyyah  (pre-lslamic 
period  of  ignorance)  is  annulled  and  under  my  feet,  and  the 
first  Riba  I  annul  is  the  Riba  of  Al-'Abbds  (the  Prophet's 
uncle).  »(1* 


We  should  mention  that  the  Prophet  jg  did  not  require  the 


|i| 


Abu  Dawud  3 :628 . 


72 


Tafsir  Ibtt  Kathfr 

return  of  the  interest  that  they  gained  on  their  Riba  during  the 
time  of  Jahiliyyah.  Rather,  he  pardoned  the  cases  of  Riba  that 
occured  in  the  past,  just  as  Allah  said, 

ishall  not  be  punished  far  the  past;  his  case  is  far  Allah  (to 
judge).} 

Said  bin  Jubayr  and  As-Suddi  said  that, 

C  %} 

ishall  not  be  punished  far  the  past}  refers  to  the  Riba  one 
consumed  before  it  was  prohibited.*11  Allah  then  said, 


iBut  whoever  returns}  meaning,  deals  in  Riba  after  gaining 
knowledge  that  Allah  prohibited  it,  then  that  warrants 
punishment,  and  in  this  case,  the  proof  will  have  been 
established  against  such  person.  This  is  why  Allah  said, 


isuch  are  the  dioellcrs  of  the  Fire  -  they  will  abide  therein 
forever.} 


Abu  Dawud  recorded  that  Jabir  said,  “When 


iThose  ivho  eat  Riba  will  not  stand  (on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection)  except  like  a  person  beaten  by  Shaytan  leading 
him  to  insanity  ) 

was  revealed,  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


l*3j 2.jj  jjt  jijlli  jjj  J  iy*t 

/  '  * 


« Whoever  does  not  refrain  from  Mukhabarah,  then  let  him  receive  a 
notice  of  war  from  Alldlt  and  His  Messenger,  »”*2’ 

Al-Hakim  also  recorded  this  in  his  Mustadrak ,|3’  and  he  said, 
“It  is  Sahih  according  to  the  criteria  of  Muslim,  and  he  did  not 
record  it.”  Mukhabarah  (sharecropping),  farming  land  in  return 


111  IbnAbiH&tim  3:1135. 
*2*  Abu  Dawud  3 :695. 

131  Al-Hakim  2:285. 


73 


Surah  2 ,  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) 


for  some  of  its  produce,  was  prohibited.  Muza.ba.nah,  trading 
fresh  dates  still  on  trees  with  dried  dates  already  on  the  ground, 
was  prohibited.  Muhdqalah,  which  refers  to  trading  produce  not 
yet  harvested,  with  crops  already  harvested,  was  also  prohibited. 
These  were  prohibited  to  eradicate  the  possibility  that  Riba 
might  be  involved,  for  the  quality  and  equity  of  such  items  are 
only  known  after  they  become  dry. 

The  subject  of  Riba  is  a  difficult  subject  for  many  scholars. 
We  should  mention  that  the  Leader  of  the  Faithful,  TJmar  bin 
Al-Khattab,  said,  “I  wished  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  sg  had 
made  three  matters  clearer  for  us,  so  that  we  could  refer  to  his 
decision:  the  grandfather  (regarding  inheriting  from  his 
grandchildren),  the  Kalalah  (those  who  leave  neither 
descendants  nor  ascendants  as  heirs)  and  some  types  of 
Riba.” 1,1  TJmar  was  refering  to  the  types  of  transactions  where 
it  is  not  clear  whether  they  involve  Riba  or  not.  The  Shari'ah 
supports  the  rule  that  for  any  matter  that  is  unlawful,  then  the 
means  to  it  are  also  unlafwful,  because  whatever  results  in  the 
unlawful  is  unlawful,  in  the  same  way  that  whenever  an 
obligation  will  not  be  complete  except  with  something,  then  that 
something  is  itself  an  obligation. 

The  Two  Sahihs  recorded  that  An-Nu'man  bin  Bashir  said 
that  he  heard  the  Messenger  of  Allah  sfe  say, 

I  killi  ij  olj  d1.  *1)!D 

CfJ  CfJ  '-HfjtJ  Hi-fi 


iBoth  lawful  and  unlawful  things  are  evident,  but  in  between 
them  there  are  matters  that  are  not  clear.  So  whoever  saves 
himself  from  these  unclear  matters,  he  saves  his  religion  and  his 
honor.  And  whoever  indulges  in  these  unclear  matters,  he  will 
have  fallen  into  the  prohibitions,  just  like  a  shepherd  who  grazes 
(his  animals)  near  a  private  pasture,  at  any  moment  he  is  liable 
to  enter 


The  Sunan  records  that  Al-Hasan  bin  ‘Ali  said  that  he  heard 
the  Messenger  of  Allah  say. 


m  Fath  Al-Bari  10 :48 ,  Muslim  4 :2322 . 
121  Fath  Al-Bari  1 : 1 53 ,  Muslim  3:1219. 


74 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


V  U  Jj  U 

"Leave  that  which  makes  you  doubt  for  that  which  does  not 
make  you  doubt. »(I1 

Ahmad  recorded  that  Said  bin  Al-Musayyib  said  that  ‘Umar 
said,  “The  Ayah  about  Riba,  was  one  of  the  last  Ayat  to  be 
revealed,  and  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  died  before  he 
explained  it  to  us.  So  leave  that  which  makes  you  doubt  for 
that  which  does  not  make  you  doubt.”*2* 

Ibn  Majah  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Alldh  said, 

*<•1  ^  *  Ijji  j y'-~“ 

"Riba  is  seventy  types,  the  least  of  which  is  equal  to  one  having 
sexual  intercourse  with  his  mother. »*3* 


Continuing  on  the  subject  of  prohibiting  the  means  that  lead 
to  the  unlawful,  there  is  a  1 Hadtth  that  Ahmad  recorded  in 
which  ‘A’ishah  said,  “When  the  Ayat  in  Surat  Al-Baqarah 
about  Riba  were  revealed,  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  went  out 
to  the  Masjid  and  recited  them  and  also  prohibited  trading  in 
alcohol.  ”*4*  The  Six  collections  recorded  this  Hadtth,  with  the 
exception  of  At-Tirmidhi.*5*  The  Two  Sahihs  recorded  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  sg  said, 


<u  1  j*}> 


"May  Allah  curse  the  Jews!  Allah  forbade  them  to  eat  animal 
fat,  but  they  melted  it  and  sold  it,  eating  its  price .»*6* 

‘Ali  and  Ibn  Mas'iid  narrated  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 
j  aj-Ia Li j  a! J?T  <il 

^  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  7 :22 1 ,  An-Nasal  8 :328 . 

{2]  Ahmad  1 :36,  Ibn  Majah  no.  2276. 

^  Ibn  Majah  2:764,  similar  was  recorded  by  Al-Hakim  2:37,  and  he 
said  "It  is  Sahih  according  to  the  criteria  of  the  Two  Shaykhs ,  but 
they  did  not  record  it/* 

^  Ahmad  6:46. 

151  Fath  Al-Bari  8:51,  Muslim  3:1206,  Abu  Dawud  3:759,  An-Nasal 
in  Al-Kubra  6 :306 ,  Ibn  Majah  2 : 1 122 . 

^  Fath  Al-Bari  6 : 572,  Muslim  1207. 


75 


Surah  2 ,  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) _ 

«May  Allah  curse  whoever  consumes  Riba,  whoever  pays  Riba, 
the  two  who  are  witnesses  to  it,  and  the  scribe  who  records 
if..'1' 


They  say  they  only  have  witnesses  and  a  scribe  to  write  the 
Rib&  contract  when  they  want  it  to  appear  to  be  a  legitimate 
agreement,  but  it  is  still  invalid  because  the  ruling  is  applied 
to  the  agreement  itself,  not  the  form  that  it  appears  in.  Verily, 
deeds  are  judged  by  their  intentions. 


<J»>-  'll 


4276.  A//fl/i  will  destroy  Riba  and  will  give  increase  for 
Sadaqat.  And  Allah  likes  not  the  disbelievers,  sinners.} 

4277.  Truly,  those  who  believe,  and  do  deeds  of  righteousness, 
and  perform  the  Salah  and  give  Zakdh,  they  will  have  their 
reward  with  their  Lord.  On  them  shall  be  no  fear,  nor  shall 
they  grieve .} 


Allah  Does  Not  Bless  Riba 


Allah  states  that  He  destroys  Riba,  either  by  removing  this 
money  from  those  who  eat  it,  or  by  depriving  them  of  the 
blessing,  and  thus  the  benefit  of  their  money.  Because  of  their 
Riba,  Allah  will  torment  them  in  this  life  and  punish  them  for 
it  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection.  Allah  said, 


4Say:  "Not  equal  are  Al-Khabith  (evil  things)  and  At-Tayyib 
(good  things),  even  though  the  abundance  of  Al-Khabith  may 
please  you"}  (5:1001 


,4 


4And  put  the  wicked  (disbelievers  and  doers  of  evil  deeds)  one 
over  another,  heap  them  together  and  cast  them  into  Hell} 
j8:37],  and, 


111  Muslim  3:1219. 


76 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kqthtr 


ii $  Xr.  \Jff  Jii  Jyt  xi  \£Q  iSj  JA 


4  And  that  which  you  give  in  gift  (to  others),  in  order  that  it 
may  increase  (your  wealth  by  expecting  to  get  a  better  one  in 
return)  from  other  people's  property,  has  no  increase  with 
Allah}  (30:39]. 

Ibn  Jarir  said  that  Allah’s  statement, 


4 Allah  will  destroy  Riba }  is  similar  to  the  statement  reported  of 
‘Abdullah  bin  Mastid,  “ Riba,  will  end  up  with  less,  even  if  it  was 
substantial."*1*  Imam  Ahmad  recorded  a  similar  statement  in 
Al-Musnad ,*2* 


Allah  Increases  Charity,  Just  as  One  Raises  His  Animal 

Allah’s  statement, 


4And  will  give  increase  for  Sadaqdt  } 

means,  Allah  makes  charity  grow,  or  He  increases  it.  Al- 
Bukhari  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  the  Messenger 
of  Allah  sg  said, 


4&S  ft  »widi  V!  Jii  ^  h  Yj£  Jlu;  jte  p 

j4  Oj£j  U5  I4u>-Ua] 


^Whoever  gives  in  charity  what  equals  a  date  from  honest 
resources,  and  Allah  only  accepts  that  which  is  good  and  pure, 
then  Allah  accepts  it  with  His  right  (Hand)  and  raises  it  for  its 
giver,  just  as  one  of  you  raises  his  animal,  until  it  becomes  as 
big  as  a  mountain  .v3* 


This  was  recorded  in  the  book  of  Zakah.{4] 


Allah  Does  not  Like  the  Disbelieving  Sinners 

Allah’s  statement, 

111  At-Tabari  6:15. 

121  Ahmad  1 :395. 

131  Fath  Al-Bari  3 :326 ,  13:426. 

*4*  Muslim  2  :702 . 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (Portal 


77 


<C*  /r  '$  4*4 *  'iS» 

4And  Allah  likes  not  the  disbelievers,  sinners} 

indicates  that  Allah  does  not  like  he  who  has  a  disbelieving 
heart,  who  is  a  sinner  in  tongue  and  action.  There  is  a 
connection  between  the  beginning  of  the  Ayah  on  Riba,  and 
what  Allah  ended  it  with.  Those  who  consume  Riba  are  not 
satisfied  with  the  permissible  and  pure  resources  that  Allah 
provided  them.  Instead,  they  try  to  illegally  acquire  people’s 
money  by  relying  on  evil  methods.  This  demonstrates  their 
lack  of  appreciation  for  the  bounty  that  Allah  provides. 


Praising  Those  Who  Thank  Allah 

Allah  praised  those  who  believe  in  His  Lordship,  obey  His 
commands,  thank  Him  and  appreciate  Him.  They  are  those 
who  are  kind  to  His  creation,  establish  prayer  and  give  charity 
due  on  their  money.  Allah  informed  them  of  the  honor  that  He 
has  prepared  for  them  and  that  they  will  be  safe  from  the 
repercussions  of  the  Day  of  Resurrection.  Allah  said, 


"  V'i"  - 

JC-C;  0 


r*  Yj  (*#•  «  rfi-> 


4Truly,  those  who  believe,  and  do  deeds  of  righteousness,  and 
perform  the  Saldh  and  give  Zakah,  they  will  have  their  reivard 
with  their  Lord.  On  them  shall  be  no  fear,  nor  sluill  they 
grieve.} 


l£2  $  4  4  u  %  *  *  &  £': 

%  V  £2  JiJ  -V-S  #  *  ^ 

1  J*-  iy-C“  Jj  }S~i*  tilv  v)f~*  /r*  SJ  SjZ  j *j  L> 

4:ASJ&  V  % 


4278.  O  you  who  believe!  Have  Taqwa  of  Allah  and  give  up 
what  remains  from  Riba,  if  you  are  (really)  believers.} 

4279.  And  if  you  do  not  do  it,  then  take  a  notice  of  war  from 
Allah  and  His  Messenger  but  if  you  repent,  you  shall  have  your 
capital  sums.  Deal  not  unjustly,  and  you  shall  not  be  dealt 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kqthir 


78 _ 

with  unjustly. $ 

4280.  And  if  the  debtor  is  having  a  hard  time,  then  grant  him 
time  till  it  is  easy  for  him  to  repay;  but  if  you  remit  it  by  way 
of  charity,  that  is  better  for  you  if  you  did  but  know.} 

4281.  And  have  Taqiud  tlte  Day  when  you  shall  be  brought 
back  to  Allah .  Then  every  person  shall  be  paid  what  he  earned, 
and  they  shall  not  be  dealt  with  unjustly .} 


The  Necessity  of  Taqwa  and  Avoiding  Riba 

Allah  commands  His  believing  servants  to  fear  Him  and 
warns  them  against  what  would  bring  them  closer  to  His 
anger  and  drive  them  away  from  His  pleasure.  Allah  said, 

'i  &&&$<&& 


40  you  who  believe!  Have  Taqwa  of  Allah} 

meaning,  fear  Him  and  remember  that  He  is  watching  all  that 
you  do. 


45^  Si  ^jj3j} 

4And  give  up  what  remains  of  Riba}  meaning,  abandon  the  Riba 
that  people  still  owe  you  upon  hearing  this  warning. 


4if  you  indeed  have  been  believers} 

believing  in  the  trade  that  He  allowed  you  and  the  prohibition 
of  Riba.  Zayd  bin  Aslam,  Ibn  Jurayj,  Muqatil  bin  Hayyan  and 
As-Suddi  said  that  this  Ayah  was  revealed  about  Bani  ‘Amr 
bin  OJmayr,  a  sub-tribe  of  Thaqif,  and  Bani  Al-Mughlrah,  from 
the  tribe  of  Bani  Makhzum,  between  whom  were  outstanding 
transactions  of  Riba  leftover  from  time  of  Jahiliyyah.  When 
Islam  came  and  both  tribes  became  Muslims,  Thaqif  required 
Bani  Al-Mughlrah  to  pay  the  Riba  of  that  transaction,  but 
Bani  Al-Mughirah  said,  “We  do  not  pay  Riba  in  Islam.”  ‘Attab 
bin  Usayd,  the  Prophet’s  deputy  on  Makkah,  wrote  to  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jgg  about  this  matter.  This  Ayah  was  then 
revealed  and  the  Messenger  of  Allah  conveyed  it  to  ‘Attab, 


4‘i^jo  Si  iyife 


79 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) _ 

40  you  who  believe!  Be  afraid  of  Allah  and  give  up  what 
remains  (due  to  you)  from  Riba  (from  now  onward),  if  you  are 
(really)  believers.  And  if  you  do  not  do  it,  then  take  a  notice  of 
war  from  Alldft  and  His  Messenger.} 

They  said,  “We  repent  to  Allah  and  abandon  whatever  is  left 
of  our  Riba”,  and  they  all  abandoned  it'1'  This  Ayah  serves  as 
a  stem  threat  to  those  who  continue  to  deal  in  Riba  after 
Allah  revealed  this  warning. 


Riba  Constitutes  War  Against  Allah  and  His  Messenger 

Ibn  Jurayj  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  that, 


ithen  take  a  notice  of  war }  means,  “Be  sure  of  a  war  from  Allah 
and  His  Messenger.”*2*  He  also  said,  “On  the  Day  of 
Resurrection,  those  who  eat  Riba  will  be  told,  “take  up  arms  for 
war.’”  He  then  recited, 


'j (J  d}} 


iAnd  if  you  do  not  do  it,  then  take  a  notice  of  war  from  Allah 
and  His  Messenger. }^ 

‘Ali  bin  Abi  Talhah  said  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said  about, 


J*'  oi  oj»7 


iAnd  if  you  do  not  do  it,  then  take  a  notice  of  war  from  Allah 
and  His  Messenger ,} 

“Whoever  kept  dealing  with  Riba  and  did  not  refrain  from  it, 
then  the  Muslim  Leader  should  require  him  to  repent.  If  he 
still  did  not  refrain  from  Ribd,  the  Muslim  Leader  should  cut 
off  his  head.”*4* 

Allah  then  said, 

4  V  J-jij  (jfeaJli 


}But  if  you  repent,  you  shall  have  your  capital  sums.  Deal  not 
unjustly} 


***  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3 :1 140,1 141 .  This  stoiy  is  not  authentic. 
,2*  At-Jabari  6:26. 

*3*  At-Tabari  6:25. 

141  At-Tabari  6:25. 


80 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathfr 


by  taking  the  Riba, 


iAttd  you  shall  not  be  dealt  with  unjustly} 

meaning,  your  original  capital  will  not  diminish.  Rather,  you 
will  receive  only  what  you  lent  without  increase  or  decrease. 
Ibn  Abi  Hatim  recorded  that  ‘Amr  bin  Al-Ahwas  said,  “The 
Messenger  of  Allah  sg  gave  a  speech  during  the  Farewell  Hay 
saying; 


V  icUUJl  J  Jll  Cj  l\  vt» 

tyb'y  xf  t  £yay  \jj  J jfj  t  j yjlaj'j j  j yijou 


’‘Verily,  every  case  of  Riba  from  the  Jahiliyyah  is  completely 
annulled.  You  will  only  take  back  your  capital,  without  increase 
or  decrease.  The  first  Riba  that  l  annul  is  the  Riba  of  Al-‘ Abbas 
bin  ‘ Abdul-Muttalib ,  all  of  it  is  annulled  j111 


Being  Kind  to  Debtors  Who  Face  Financial  Difficulties 

Allah  said, 


4And  if  the  debtor  is  having  a  hard  time,  then  grant  him  time 
till  it  is  easy  for  him  to  repay;  but  if  you  remit  it  by  way  of 
charity,  that  is  better  for  you  if  you  did  but  know.} 

Allah  commands  creditors  to  be  patient  with  debtors  who  are 
having  a  hard  time  financially, 


4 And  if  the  debtor  is  having  a  hard  time  (lias  no  money),  then 
grant  him  time  till  it  is  easy  far  him  to  repay.} 

During  the  time  of  Jahiliyyah,  when  the  debt  came  to  term, 
the  creditor  would  say  to  the  debtor,  “Either  pay  now  or 
interest  will  be  added  to  the  debt.” 

Allah  encouraged  creditors  to  give  debtors  respite  regarding 
their  debts  and  promised  all  that  is  good,  and  a  great  reward 


Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3:1147. 


81 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) 


from  Him  for  this  righteous  deed, 


iBut  if  you  remit  it  by  way  of  charity,  that  is  better  for  you  if 
you  did  but  know} 

meaning,  if  you  forfeit  your  debts  and  cancel  them  completely. 

Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Sulayman  bin  Buraydah  said 
that  his  father  said,  “I  heard  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  say, 


0a»JL2»  di;  fjj  di  4 'jeu\ 


^Whoever  gives  time  to  a  debtor  facing  hard  times,  will  gain 
charity  of  equal  proportions  for  each  day  he  gives.* 


I  also  heard  the  Prophet  sg  say, 


‘Whoever  gives  time  to  a  debtor  facing  hard  times,  will  earn 
charity  multiplied  two  times  for  each  day  he  gives.* 

I  said,  ‘O  Messenger  of  Allah!  I  heard  you  say,  “Whoever  gives 
time  to  a  debtor  facing  hard  times,  will  gain  charity  of  equal 
proportions  for  each  day  he  gives.’  I  also  heard  you  say, 
Whoever  gives  time  to  a  debtor  facing  hard  times,  will  earn 
charity  multiplied  by  two  times  for  each  day  he  gives.’  He  sg 
said, 


f  * 


i \  di  ^  *0?^'  did?  di;  d” 


* O JlI?  e*^L* 


‘He  will  earn  charity  of  equal  proportions  for  each  day  (he  gives 
time)  before  the  term  of  the  debt  comes  to  an  end,  and  when  the 
term  comes  to  an  end,  he  will  again  acquire  charity  multiplied 
by  two  times  for  each  day  if  he  gives  more  ffme.®”*1' 

Ahmad  recorded  that  Muhammad  bin  Ka“b  Al-Qurazi  said 
that  Abu  Qatadah  had  a  debt  on  a  man,  who  used  to  hide 
from  Abu  Qatadah  when  he  looked  for  him  to  pay  what  he 
owed  him.  One  day,  Abu  Qatadah  came  looking  for  the  debtor 
and  a  young  boy  came  out,  and  he  asked  him  about  the 
debtor  and  found  out  that  he  was  in  the  house  eating.  Abu 


I1*  Ahmad  5 :360. 


82 


Tgfsir  Ibn  Kathir 


Qatadah  said  in  a  loud  voice,  “O  Fellow!  Come  out,  for  I  was 
told  that  you  are  in  the  house.”  The  man  came  out  and  Abu 
Qatadah  asked  him,  “Why  are  you  hiding  from  me?"  The  man 
said,  “I  am  having  a  hard  time  financially,  and  I  do  not  have 
any  money.”  Abu  Qatadah  said,  “By  Allah,  are  you  truly  facing 
a  hard  time?”  He  said,  “Yes.”  Abu  Qatadah  cried  and  said,  “I 
heard  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  say, 

•vdi  j-A  ,>  ^  otf  .fc  u;  j\  &  A*  if' 


« Whoever  gives  time  to  his  debtor,  or  forgives  the  debt,  will  be 
in  the  shade  of  the  Throne  (of  Allah)  on  the  Day  of 
Resurrection  .a”1'1 


Muslim  also  recorded  this  Hadith  in  his  Sahib.*2* 

Al-Hafiz  Abu  Yala  Al-Mawsili  recorded  that  Hudhayfah  said 
that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


U  :Jia  ^  J  cJ Li  liU  :Jl i  udl  ft  Jil  Jo 

Jii  -  oi f  cj'H  tjju  -  {4,  CjJi  'jt  jji  jiii j  Zj’j  u  <lii  cJL* 
c2Sj  iJU  J ju  Sis  JjLiJ  Zj'j  U  :  U jS\ 

4i)l  J  yC*  -  <3t»  i  jJj  ’jSj  I  t  j  I  yS  1  )j*  o^Sj 

«SiJl  Jsijl  s  ^  : 


«On  the  Day  of  Resurrection,  one  of  Allah's  servants  will  be 
summoned  before  Him  and  He  will  ask  him,  "What  deeds  did 
you  perform  for  Me  in  your  life?"  He  will  say,  "O  Lord!  In  my 
life,  I  have  not  performed  a  deed  for  Your  sake  that  equals  an 
atom,"  three  times.  Tlte  third  time,  the  servant  will  add,  " O 
Lord!  You  granted  me  wealth  and  I  used  to  be  a  merchant.  I 
used  to  be  lenient,  giving  easy  terms  to  those  well-off  and 
giving  time  to  the  debtors  who  faced  hard  times."  Alltih  will 
say,  “I  Am  the  Most  Worthy  of  giving  easy  terms.  Therefore, 
enter  Paradise 


Al-Bukhari,  Muslim  and  Ibn  Majah  also  recorded  this  Hadith 
from  Hudhayfah,  and  Muslim  recorded  a  similar  wording  from 
‘Uqbah  bin  ‘Amir  and  Abu  Mas “ud  Al-Badri.*3* 


111  Ahmad  5:308. 

*2*  Muslim  4 :2084 . 

(3)  Fath  Al-Bari  6 :570 ,  Muslim  3 : 1 195 ,  Ibn  Majah  2 :808 . 


83 


Surah  2 .  AhSagarah  (Part-3) 


IA 


_  U  **Y  *  r  <  \  ^A\\\ ^ 

O^^'j  C^W^V(*^  <j^  (v^ssO^jCr; 

>£===>■&  I'C  J4JLI' ,>*  iiy^j o-i-f 

^/>  /'•fr  *A, 

^-xia  Lp^-U  *y^W  e>l>u 

t >L-^ j  '  *5 ji  i^U_Ji3 

$  jLX 


Allah  further 
advised  His  servants, 
by  reminding  them 
that  this  life  will  soon 
end  and  all  the 
wealth  in  it  will 
vanish.  He  also 
reminded  them  that 
the  Hereafter  will 
surely  come,  when 
the  Return  to  Him 
will  occur,  and  that 
He  will  hold  His 
creation  accountable 
for  what  they  did, 
rewarding  them  or 
punishing  them 
accordingly.  Allah 
also  warned  them 
against  His  torment, 

j>  A-i  Vaj > 

^  Kjf3  y  o>>  p  •& 
4  '*(  iiyUi  V  |C*J  cX— *^=» 


4 And  have  Taqwd  for  the  Day  when  you  shall  be  brought  back 
to  Allah.  Then  every  person  shall  be  paid  what  he  earned,  and 
they  shall  not  be  dealt  with  unjustly.} 


It  was  reported  that  this  was  the  last  Ayah  revealed  from  the 
Glorious  Qur’an.  An-Nasal  recorded  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “The 
last  Ayah  to  be  revealed  from  the  Qur’an  was, 


V  c£. 


&  d!  #!*. 


65  !A&» 


4And  have  Taqwd  for  the  Day  when  you  shall  be  brought  back 
to  Allah .  Then  every  person  shall  be  paid  what  he  earned,  and 
they  shall  not  be  dealt  with  unjustly. "}^ 

**'  An-Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  6 :307 . 


84 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kgthir 


This  is  the  same  narration  reported  by  Ad-Dahhak  and  Al- 
‘Awfi  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas.'1' 


di  &  pp  rp:  pj\ 
iS  ~j4>J  CiiUji  'it  life.  ;J£  J  ^  vt  i;  JJ^jX 
;t  \L£  jt  4^  ,<&  4'  &£  kp  p  pz  is  &  'it  £?s  &Jt 

ip  $  4  ^  ^  1^5  ‘jxft  ii>;  ’p&lU.S'&k* 

dp  p4&  dp  ip  ot  *  vpy  p  -jP\'p3  542  &> 

p\  it  <j4=.  j\  id  1J4&  J  is  Ui  tf  rH  tf^iit  it  is  *>it 

*yi»U  »_rl»U  Vp>  ^  tjjttjj  it  ^jtj  j.ljyi.1]  jjjf  tlXV  p^J'j 

525  iS  Spa  »H  i;l*itj  ts£&  it  ^  £&  S$  p4Z  4/jp 
a  ^  its  it  £43  it  i^its  ;4  tji5  ois  is 


4282 .  0  you  who  believe !  When  you  contract  a  debt  for  a  fixed 
period,  write  it  down.  Let  a  scribe  write  it  down  in  justice 
between  you.  Let  not  the  scribe  refuse  to  write,  as  Allah  has 
taught  him,  so  let  him  write.  Let  him  (the  debtor)  who  incurs 
the  liability  dictate,  and  he  must  have  Taqwd  of  Allah,  his 
Lord,  and  diminish  not  anything  of  what  he  owes.  But  if  the 
debtor  is  of  poor  understanding,  or  weak,  or  is  unable  to  dictate 
for  himself,  then  let  his  guardian  dictate  in  justice.  And  get  two 
witnesses  out  of  your  own  men .  And  if  there  are  not  two  men 
(available),  then  a  man  and  two  women,  such  as  you  agree  for 
ivitnesses,  so  that  if  one  of  them  (two  women)  errs,  the  other 
can  remind  her.  And  the  wihiesses  should  not  refuse  when  they 
are  called  (for  evidence).  You  should  not  become  weary  to  write 
it  (your  contract),  whether  it  be  small  or  big,  for  its  fixed  term, 
that  is  more  just  ivith  Allah;  more  solid  as  evidence,  and  more 
convenient  to  pnvent  doubts  among  yourselves,  save  when  it  is 
a  present  trade  which  you  carry  out  on  the  spot  among 
yourselves,  then  there  is  no  sin  on  you  if  you  do  not  write  it 
down.  But  take  witnesses  whenever  you  make  a  commercial 
contract.  Let  neither  scribe  nor  wihiess  suffer  any  harm,  but  if 


m 


At-Tabari  6 :40 . 


85 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  ( Park! ) _ _ 

you  do  (such  harm),  it  would  be  wickedness  in  you.  So  have 
Taqwd  of  Allah;  and  Allah  teaches  you.  And  Allah  is  the  All- 
Knower  of  everything  .} 


The  Necessity  of  Writing  Transactions  That  Take  Effect 
Later  on 


This  Ayah  is  the  longest  in  the  Glorious  Qur’an.  Imam  Abu 
Ja‘far  bin  Jarir  recorded  that  Said  bin  Al-Musayyib  said  that 
he  was  told  that  the  Ayah  most  recently  revealed  from  above 
the  Throne  -  the  last  Ayah  to  be  revealed  in  the  Qur’an  -  was 
the  Ayah  about  debts.*11 
Allah’s  statement, 


tii  \p: 


iO  you  who  believe!  When  you  contract  a  debt  for  a  fixed 
period,  write  it  down ^ 


directs  Allah’s  believing  servants  to  record  their  business 
transactions  when  their  term  is  delayed,  to  preserve  the  terms 
and  timing  of  these  transactions,  and  the  memory  of 
witnesses,  as  mentioned  at  the  end  of  the  Ayah, 


*51 iph  p  p  PP\ 


ithat  is  more  just  with  Allah;  more  solid  as  evidence,  and  more 
convenient  to  prevent  doubts  among  yourselves.} 


The  Two  Sahihs  recorded  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  “Allah’s 
Messenger  jg  came  to  Al-Madlnah,  while  the  people  were  in  the 
habit  of  paying  in  advance  for  fruits  to  be  delivered  within  one 
or  two  years.  The  Messenger  of  Allah  said, 


1 Whoever  pays  money  in  advance  (for  dates  to  be  delivered 
later)  should  pay  it  for  known  specified  measure  and  weight  (of 
the  dates)  for  a  specified  datefo2^ 


Allah’s  statement, 


*!*  At-Tabari  6 :41 . 

*2*  FathAl-Bari 4: 105,  Muslim  3:1226. 


86 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


iwrite  it  doion}  is  a  command  from  Him  to  record  such 
transactions  to  endorse  and  preserve  their  terms.  Ibn  Jurayj 
said,  “Whoever  borrowed  should  write  the  terms,  and  whoever 
bought  should  have  witnesses."*11  Abu  Said,  Ash-Sha'bi,  Ar- 
Rabr  bin  Anas,  Al-Hasan,  Ibn  Jurayj  and  Ibn  Zayd  said  that 
recording  such  transactions  was  necessary  before,  but  was 
then  abrogated  by  Allah’s  statement, 

iijl  4?  4  & 

iThen  if  one  of  you  entrusts  the  other,  let  the  one  who  is 
entrusted  discharge  his  trust  (faithfully) 

Allah’s  statement. 


iLet  a  scribe  write  it  down  in  justice  between  you  } 


and  in  truth.  Therefore,  the  scribe  is  not  allowed  to  cheat  any 
party  of  the  contract  and  is  to  only  record  what  the  parties  of 
the  contract  agreed  to,  without  addition  or  deletion.  Allah’s 
statement, 


\\  a-  a;  •$> 


iLet  not  the  scribe  refuse  to  write,  as  Allah  has  taught  him,  so 
let  him  write} 


means,  “Those  who  know  how  to  write  should  not  refrain  from 
writing  transaction  contracts  when  asked  to  do  so."  Further, 
let  writing  such  contracts  be  a  type  of  charity  from  the  scribe 
for  those  who  are  not  lettered,  just  as  Allah  taught  him  what 
he  knew  not.  Therefore,  let  him  write,  just  as  the  Hadith 
stated, 


o/f  is  a  type  of  charity  to  help  a  worker  and  to  do  something  for 
a  feeble  person  V3* 

In  another  Hadith,  the  Prophet  jg  said, 

*jU  UiJ I  Lie-  D 


111  At-Tabari  6:47. 

*2*  At-Tabari  6:47 ,49 ,50. 
131  Fath  Al-B&ri  5:176. 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) 


87 


«1 Whoever  kept  knowledge  to  himself  will  be  restrained  by  a 
bridle  made  of  fire  on  the  Day  of  Resurrection  V1* 

Mujahid  and  ‘Ata’  said  that  if  asked  to  do  so,  “The  scribe  is 
required  to  record.” 

Allah’s  statement, 


'it  &Jf  tS  4' 


iLet  him  (the  debtor)  who  incurs  the  liability  dictate,  and  he 
must  have  Taqwa  of  Allah,  his  Lord} 

indicates  that  the  debtor  should  dictate  to  the  scribe  what  he 
owes,  so  let  him  fear  Allah, 


iAnd  diminish  not  anything  of  what  he  owes,}  meaning,  not  hide 
any  portion  of  what  he  owes. 

iBut  if  the  debtor  is  of  poor  understanding} 

and  is  not  allowed  to  decide  on  such  matters,  because  he  used 
to  waste  money,  for  instance, 

iOr  weak},  such  as  being  too  young  or  insane, 

iOr  is  unable  to  dictate  for  himself}  because  of  a  disease,  or 
ignorance  about  such  matters, 

ithen  let  his  guardian  dictate  in  justice.} 


Witnesses  Should  Attend  the  Dictation  of  Contracts 

Allah  said, 

iri  $*-] r-  } 

iAnd  get  two  witnesses  out  of  your  own  men} 
requiring  witnesses  to  attend  the  dictation  of  contracts  to 

m 


At-Tabarani  5:11. 


88 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kqthfr 


further  preserve  the  contents, 

542  £»  &  p 


4 And  if  there  are  not  two  men  (available),  then  a  man  and  two 
women  } 


this  requirement  is  only  for  contracts  that  directly  or  indirectly 
involve  money.  Allah  requires  that  two  women  take  the  place 
of  one  man  as  witness,  because  of  the  woman’s  shortcomings, 
as  the  Prophet  jg  described.  Muslim  recorded  in  his  Sahih  that 
Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  ss  said, 


«J&1  Jil  ')$\  ‘J&Jl'j  Jji  OliLWl  «  u« 


«0  women!  Give  away  charity  and  ask  for  forgiveness,  for  1 
saw  that  you  comprise  tlte  majority  of  the  people  of  the  Fire.* 

One  eloquent  woman  said,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah!  Why  do 
we  comprise  the  majority  of  the  people  of  the  Fire?”  He  said, 


ifr I  oLJailj  Oo I j  l* j  ‘ 


"You  curse  a  lot  and  you  do  not  appreciate  your  mate.  I  have 
never  seen  those  who  have  shortcoming  in  mind  and  religion 
controlling  those  who  have  sound  minds,  other  than  you.* 

She  said,  “O  Messenger  of  Allah!  What  is  this  shortcoming  in 
mind  and  religion?”  He  jg  said. 


iJaaJI  jUiii  1  (JjuJ  jjl ( l  jUul  \P* 


« As  far  the  shortcoming  in  her  mind,  the  testimony  of  two 
women  equals  the  testimony  of  one  man,  and  this  is  the 
shortcoming  in  the  mind.  As  for  the  shortcoming  in  the 
religion,  woman  remains  far  nights  at  a  time  when  she  does  not 
pray  and  breaks  the  fast  in  Ramadan*^ 

Allah’s  statement, 


/  4  >  ✓  ms*  ✓  \ 

Ji  Oy*j  fr-iT 


4such  as  you  agree  far  witnesses}  requires  competency  in  the 


l1*  Muslim  1 :87. 


89 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) _ 

witnesses.  Further,  Allah’s  statement, 

4so  that  if  one  of  them  errs }  refers  to  the  two  women  witnesses; 
whenever  one  of  them  forgets  a  part  of  the  testimony, 

ithe  other  can  remind  her ^  meaning,  the  other  woman’s 
testimony  mends  the  shortcoming  of  forgetfulness  in  the  first 
woman. 

Allah’s  statement, 

4s>  u'  <'H  d 


4And  the  witnesses  should  not  refuse  when  they  are  called } 


means,  when  people  are  called  to  be  witnesses,  they  should 
agree,  as  Qatadah  and  Ar-Rabl‘  bin  Anas  stated.  Similarly, 
Allah  said, 


>dc.  U£=*  C. isS  t*f>  di 


iLet  not  the  scribe  refuse  to  write  as  Allah  has  taught  him,  so 
let  him  write. > 

Some  say  that  this  Ayah  indicates  that  agreeing  to  become  a 
witness  is  Fard  Kifayah  (required  on  at  least  a  part  of  the 
Muslim  Ummah).  However,  the  majority  of  the  scholars  say 
that  the  Ayah, 

*  4  *'4*  & 

iAnd  the  witnesses  should  not  refuse  when  they  are  called > 

is  referring  to  testifying  to  what  the  witnesses  actually 
witnessed,*11  thus  befitting  their  description  of  being 
‘witnesses’.  Therefore,  when  the  witness  is  called  to  testily  to 
what  he  witnessed,  he  is  required  to  give  testimony,  unless 
this  obligation  was  already  fulfilled,  in  which  case  such 
testimony  becomes  Fard  Kifayah .  Mujahid  and  Abu  Mijlaz 
said,  “If  you  are  called  to  be  a  witness,  then  you  have  the 
choice  to  agree.  If  you  witnessed  and  were  called  to  testify, 
then  come  forward.”*21  It  was  reported  that  Ibn  ‘Abbas  and  Al- 


111  At-Tabari  6:68. 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3:1181,  At-Tabari  6:71. 


90 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathtr 


Hasan  Al-Basri  said  that  the  obligation  includes  both  cases, 
agreeing  to  be  a  witness  and  testifying  to  what  one  witnessed. 
Allah’s  statement, 


iYou  should  not  become  weary  to  write  it  (your  contract), 
whether  it  be  small  or  large,  for  its  fixed  term} 

perfects  this  direction  from  Allah  by  commanding  that  the  debt 
be  written,  whether  the  amount  is  large  or  small.  Allah  said, 


iYou  should  not  become  weary}  meaning,  do  not  be  discouraged 
against  writing  transactions  and  their  terms,  whether  the 
amount  involved  is  large  or  small.  Allah’s  statement, 


i%&  41  ffl;  -if  i*  '&>} 


ithat  is  more  just  with  Allah;  more  solid  as  evidence,  and  more 
convenient  to  prevent  doubts  among  yourselves} 

means,  writing  transactions  that  will  be  fulfillled  at  a  later 
date  is  more  just  with  Allah  meaning  better  and  more 
convenient  in  order  to  preserve  the  terms  of  the  contract. 
Therefore,  recording  such  agreements  helps  the  witnesses, 
when  they  see  their  handwriting  -  or  signatures  -  later  on  and 
thus  remember  what  they  witnessed,  for  it  is  possible  that  the 
witnesses  might  forget  what  they  witnessed. 


ib&  41 


iAnd  more  convenient  to  prevent  doubts  among  yourselves} 


meaning,  this  helps  repel  any  doubt.  Since  if  you  need  to  refer 
to  the  contract  that  you  wrote  and  the  doubt  will  end. 

Allah’s  statement. 


41  ^cz  tfc&S  j  \} 


isave  when  it  is  a  present  trade  which  you  carry  out  on  the 
spot  among  yourselves,  then  there  is  no  sin  on  you  if  you  do 
not  write  it  down} 


indicates  that  if  the  transaction  will  be  fulfilled  immediately, 
then  there  is  no  harm  if  it  is  not  recorded. 


91 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) 


As  for  requiring  witnesses  to  be  present  in  trading 
transactions,  Allah  said, 


iBut  take  witnesses  whenever  you  make  a  commercial 
contract.  $ 


However,  this  command  was  abrogated  by. 


its*  siji  4?  oji 


iTlten  if  one  of  you  entrusts  the  other,  let  the  one  who  is 
entrusted  discharge  his  trust  (faithfully)  .> 

Or,  it  could  be  that  having  witnesses  in  such  cases  is  only 
recommended  and  not  obligatory,  as  evident  from  the  Hadith 
that  Khuzaymah  bin  Thabit  Al-Ansari  narrated  which  Imam 
Ahmad  collected.  TJmarah  bin  Khuzaymah  Al-Ansari  said  that 
his  uncle,  who  was  among  the  Prophet’s  Companions,  told 
him  that  the  Prophet  jg  was  making  a  deal  for  a  horse  with  a 
bedouin  man.  The  Prophet  sg  asked  the  bedouin  to  follow  him 
so  that  he  could  pay  him  the  price  of  the  horse.  The  Prophet  jg 
went  ahead  of  the  bedouin.  The  bedouin  met  several  men  who 
tried  to  buy  his  horse,  not  knowing  if  the  Prophet  sg  was 
actually  determined  to  buy  it.  Some  people  offered  more  money 
for  the  horse  than  the  Prophet  sg  had.  The  bedouin  man  said  to 
the  Prophet  jg,  “If  you  want  to  buy  this  horse,  then  buy  it  or  I 
will  sell  it  to  someone  else.”  When  he  heard  the  bedouin  man’s 
words,  the  Prophet  jg  stood  up  and  said,  “Have  I  not  bought 
that  horse  from  you?”  The  bedouin  said,  “By  Allah!  I  have  not 
sold  it  to  you.”  The  Prophet  jg  said,  “Rather,  1  did  buy  it  from 
you.”  The  people  gathered  around  the  Prophet  sg  and  the 
Bedouin  while  they  were  disputing,  and  the  bedouin  said, 
“Bring  forth  a  witness  who  testifies  that  I  sold  you  the  horse.” 
Meanwhile,  the  Muslims  who  came  said  to  the  bedouin,  “Woe  to 
you!  The  Prophet  only  says  the  truth.”  When  Khuzaymah  bin 
Thabit  came  and  heard  the  dispute  between  the  Prophet  jg  and 
the  bedouin  who  was  saying,  “Bring  forth  a  witness  who 
testifies  that  I  sold  you  the  horse,”  Khuzaymah  said,  “I  bear 
witness  that  you  sold  him  the  horse.”  The  Prophet  jg  said  to 
Khuzaymah,  “What  is  the  basis  of  your  testimony?” 
Khuzaymah  said,  “That  I  entrusted  you,  O  Messenger  of  Allah!” 
Therefore,  the  Messenger  jg  made  Khuzaymah’s  testimony 


92 _ Tafstr  Ibn  Kathir 

equal  to  the  testimony  of  two  men.*1'  This  was  also  recorded  by 
Abu  Dawud  and  An-Nasal121 
Allah’s  statement, 

ii 

iLet  neither  scribe  nor  witness  suffer  (or  cause)  any  harm}  also 
indicates  that  the  scribe  and  the  witness  must  not  cause  any 
harm,  such  as,  when  the  scribe  writes  other  than  what  he  is 
being  dictated,  or  the  witness  testifies  to  other  than  what  he 
heard  or  conceals  his  testimony.  This  is  the  explanation  of  Al- 
tfasan  and  Qatadah.”13’ 

Allah’s  statement, 

4But  if  you  do  (such  harm),  it  would  be  wickedness  in  you} 
means,  “If  you  defy  what  you  were  commanded  and  commit 
what  you  were  prohibited,  then  it  is  because  of  the  sin  that 
resides  and  remains  with  you;  sin  that  you  never  release  or  rid 
yourselves  from.” 

Allah’s  statement, 

4  So  have  Tacjwd  of  Allah}  means,  fear  Him,  remember  His  watch 
over  you,  implement  His  command  and  avoid  what  He 
prohibited, 

}And  Allah  teaches  you.}  Similarly,  Allah  said, 


4(C)  p  S4.  &  4 

40  you  who  believe!  If  you  have  Taqwa  of  Allah,  He  will  grant  you 
Furqan  [(a  criterion  to  judge  between  right  and  wrong)]}  [8:29],  and, 


£  pz  jj  pi  -AP  \U-J  sSt  jM  #£} 


40  you  who  believe!  Have  Taqwa  of  Allah,  and  believe  in  His 
[1J  Ahmad  5:215. 

(2)  Abu  Dawud  4 :31 ,  An-Nasal  7 :301 . 

[31  At-Tabari  6:85,86. 


93 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarali  (Partly 


j£S!x» 


1 


S  S  _ 


is3i\jj!Sn£aM  ^Ja»)  jA 


3S3P  \=n  Messenger,  He  will  give 
you  a  double  portion  of 
His  mercy,  and  He  will 
give  you  a  light  by 
which  you  shall  walk 
(straight)}  (57:28]. 

Allah  said; 


J ffp  !tp 

<gy  0 

\jJp\$\ySj  ‘Ay'jj 

jPu'J  j  \Ll>j  tc3a>-1  Uo_Ji  j^-'p  V  '-4j 

tet ?*G1£M£&£ 

0 


i’j-  3^=9  ^y 

iAnd  Allah  is  the  All- 
Knoiver  of  everything} 

stating  that  Allah  has 
perfect  knowledge  in 
all  matters  and  in 
their  benefits  or 
repercussions,  and 
nothing  escapes  His 
perfect  watch,  for  His 
knowledge 
encompasses 
everything  in 
existence. 


#  £  &  &  ®y 

V  -  <  •  i'-\s  !  >  < 

ju  4 — oyy  J-*j  t-8  'JXm 


0M  yj  ij&  ij  fc  if  pj  gd  pjf  4*  yp  y\ 

i%Z£  CP2  p  %  H 


4283.  And  if  you  are  on  a  journey  and  cannot  find  a  scribe, 
then  let  there  be  a  pledge  taken  (tnortgaging),  then  if  one  of  you 
entrusts  the  other,  let  the  one  who  is  entrusted  discharge  his 
trust,  and  let  him  have  Taqwd  of  Allah,  his  Lord.  And  conceal 
not  the  evidence,  for  he  who  hides  it,  surely,  his  heart  is  sinful . 
And  Allah  is  All-Knower  of  what  you  do.} 


What  is  the  Mortgaging’  Mentioned  in  the  Ayah ? 

Allah  said, 


94 


Tgfsir  Ibn  Kathir 


}And  if  you  are  on  a  journey ►  meaning,  traveling  and  some  of 
you  borrowed  some  money  to  be  paid  at  a  later  date, 

»jl-S  fif} 

iand  cannot  find  a  scribe}  who  would  record  the  debt  for  you.  Ibn 
‘Abbas  said,  “And  even  if  they  find  a  scribe,  but  did  not  find 
paper,  ink  or  pen.”  Then, 


ilet  there  be  a  pledge  taken  (mortgaging)} 

given  to  the  creditor  in  lieu  of  writing  the  transaction.  The  Two 
Sahibs  recorded  that  Anas  said  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah 
died  while  his  shield  was  mortgaged  with  a  Jew  in  return  for 
thirty  Wasq  (approximately  180  kg)  of  barley,  which  the  Prophet 
jg  bought  on  credit  as  provisions  for  his  household.  In  another 
narration,  the  Hadith  stated  that  this  Jew  was  among  the  Jews 
of  Al-Madmah.'1' 

Allah  said, 

l£o«> 

4  then  if  one  of  you  entrusts  the  other,  let  the  one  who  is 
entrusted  discharge  his  trust  (faithfully).} 

Ibn  Abi  Hatim  recorded,  with  a  sound  chain  of  narration, 
that  Abu  Said  Al-Khudri  said,  “This  Ayah  abrogated  what 
came  before  it  (i.e.  that  which  required  recording  the 
transaction  and  having  witnesses  present).”'2'  Ash-Sha‘bi  said, 
“If  you  trust  each  other,  then  there  is  no  harm  if  you  do  not 
write  the  loan  or  have  witnesses  present.”'3'  Allah's  statement, 

J~*j} 

iAnd  let  him  have  Taqwa  of  Allah}  means,  the  debtor. 

Imam  Ahmad  and  the  Sunan  recorded  that  Qatadah  said 
that  Al-Hasan  stud  that  Samurah  said  that  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  said, 

111  Fath  Al-B&ri  4 :354 ,  Muslim  3 : 1226 . 

121  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3:1202. 

'3'  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3 : 1203 . 


Surah  2 ,  Al-Baqarah  (Pat±3) 


95 


*,9  6  „  •  '  ' 


t  u  Ji 


«77ie  hand  (of  the  debtor)  will  cany  the  burden  of  what  it  took 
until  it  gives  it  backj 111 


Allah’s  statement, 


iAnd  conceal  not  the  evidence >  means,  do  not  hide  it  or  refuse 
to  announce  it.  Ibn  'Abbas  and  other  scholars  said,  “False 
testimony  is  one  of  the  worst  of  the  major  sins,  and  such  is  the 
case  with  hiding  the  true  testimony.  This  is  why  Allah  said, 


iFor  he  who  hides  it,  surely,  his  heart  is  sinful 

As-Suddi  commented,  “Meaning  he  is  a  sinner  in  his 
heart.”121 

This  is  similar  to  Allah’s  statement, 

SJ  4  Si  &  £2. 


4We  shall  not  hide  testimony  of  Allah,  for  then  indeed  we 
should  be  of  the  sinful f  [5:106], 


Allah  said, 

#4$'  if-  jfc  <4 

ijjij  ojS  b i-A  c?  isA 


v/f  \$x  \fk 
%  ^  a  oi 

c  'jr  &  %  AA 


<0  you  who  believe!  Stand  out  firmly  for  justice,  as  witnesses 
to  Allah,  even  though  it  be  against  yourselves,  or  your  parents, 
or  your  kin,  be  he  rich  or  poor,  Allah  is  a  better  Protector  to 
both  (than  you).  So  follow  not  the  lusts  (of  your  hearts),  lest 
you  avoid  justice ;  and  if  you  distort  your  witness  or  refuse  to 
give  it,  verily,  Allah  is  Ever  Well-Acquainted  with  what  you 
do>  [4:135] 

and  in  this  Ayah  [2:283]  He  said, 


m  Ahmad  5:13,  Abu  Dawud  3:822,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  4:482,  An- 
Nasal  in  Al-Kubra  3  :41 1 ,  Ibn  Majah  2  :802 . 

121  At-Tabari  6:100. 


4  And  conceal  not  the  evidence,  for  he  who  hides  it,  surely,  his 
heart  is  sinful.  And  Allah  is  All-Knower  of  what  you  do.} 


i->  *i  -i. 


^  W.  -£•*-*  ^  <~~Tg  ^  ^  V1^-1 


4284.  To  Allah  belongs  all  that  is  in  the  heavens  and  all  that  is 
on  the  earth,  and  whether  you  disclose  what  is  in  yourselves  or 
conceal  it,  Allah  will  call  you  to  account  for  it.  Then  He 
forgives  whotn  He  wills  and  punishes  whom  He  wills.  And 
Allah  is  able  to  do  all  things .} 


Would  the  Servants  be  Accountable  for  What  They 
Conceal  in  Their  Hearts? 


Allah  states  that  His  is  the  kingship  of  the  heavens  and 
earth  and  of  what  and  whoever  is  on  or  between  them,  that 
He  has  perfect  watch  over  them.  No  apparent  matter  or  secret 
that  the  heart  conceals  is  ever  a  secret  to  Him,  however  minor 
it  is.  Allah  also  states  that  He  will  hold  His  servants 
accountable  for  what  they  do  and  what  they  conceal  in  their 
hearts.  In  similar  statements,  Allah  said, 


ufjj\  j  Uj  U*  jA  <uU»  ji  yx+  ^  U  ty 


;5*yi  sH-  Ck 


4 Say  (O  Mulmnmad  jfe) :  "Whether  you  hide  what  is  in  your 
breasts  or  reveal  it,  Allah  knows  it,  and  He  knows  what  is  in 
the  heavens  and  what  is  in  the  earth.  And  Allah  is  able  to  do 
all  things }  [3:29],  and, 


<J&3  & 

4He  knows  the  secret  and  that  which  is  yet  more  hidden.} 

There  are  many  other  Ayat  on  this  subject.  In  this  Ayah 
[2:284],  Allah  states  that  He  has  knowledge  of  what  the  hearts 
conceal,  and  consequently,  He  will  hold  the  creation 
accountable  for  whatever  is  in  their  hearts.  This  is  why  when 
this  Ayah  was  revealed,  it  was  hard  on  the  Companions,  since 
out  of  their  strong  faith  and  conviction,  they  were  afraid  that 


97 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) 


such  reckoning  would  diminish  their  good  deeds. 

Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said,  “When 


ill 


"  U  jjj  cf >3^1'  4  4  ^ 

p  4^-  £  Sft  JS  4-i25  tf2S  44  ^ 


iTo  Allah  belongs  all  that  is  in  the  heavens  and  all  that  is  on 
the  earth,  and  whether  you  disclose  what  is  in  yourselves  or 
conceal  it,  Allah  will  call  you  to  account  for  it.  Then  He 
forgives  whom  He  wills  and  punishes  lohom  He  zoills.  And 
Allah  is  able  to  do  all  things} 

was  revealed  to  the  Messenger  of  Allah  sg,  it  was  very  hard 
for  the  Companions  of  the  Messenger  sfe.  The  Companions 
came  to  the  Messenger  and  fell  to  their  knees  saying,  ‘O 
Messenger  of  Allah!  We  were  asked  to  perform  what  we  can 
bear  of  deeds:  the  prayer,  the  fast,  Jihad  and  charity.  However, 
this  Ayah  was  revealed  to  you,  and  we  cannot  bear  it.’  The 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


Cj  vijLil  fi,  UjJslj 


“Do  you  want  to  repeat  what  the  People  of  the  Two  Scriptures 
before  you  said,  that  is,  We  hear  and  we  disobey?'  Rather,  say, 
We  hear  and  we  obey,  and  we  seek  Your  forgiveness,  O  our 
Lord,  and  the  Return  is  to  Yom.d 


When  the  people  accepted  this  statement  and  their  tongues 
recited  it,  Allah  sent  down  afterwards, 


g;  jssjl  tafj  ^  ifcs  «  P  & 


iThe  Messenger  believes  in  what  has  been  sent  down  to  him  from 
his  Lord,  and  (so  do)the  believers.  Each  one  believes  in  Allah, 
His  Angels,  His  Books,  and  His  Messengers.  (They  say,)  'We 
make  no  distinction  between  one  another  of  His  Messengers"  — 
and  they  say,  'We  hear,  and  we  obey.  (We  seek)  Your 
forgiveness,  our  Lord,  and  to  You  is  the  return  (of  all)."} 

When  they  did  that,  Allah  abrogated  the  Ayah  (2:284]  and 
sent  down  the  Ayah, 


98 


Tafsir  Ibn  Katlur 


u)  tjji-IJS  V  \Jij  *1 1,  U  c*»-^  U  tp  l4*^j  l  ■  — *»  iif  ijC 

4&LS  y. 


iAllah  burdens  not  a  person  beyond  his  scope.  He  gets  reioard 
far  that  (good)  which  he  has  earned,  and  he  is  punished  far  that 
(evil)  which  he  has  earned.  " Our  Lord!  Punish  us  not  if  we 
forget  or  fall  into  error.  '>  until  the  end.”111 

Muslim  recorded  it  with  the  wording;  “When  they  did  that, 
Allah  abrogated  it  [2:284]  and  sent  down, 


4  v  C;  6  c  O  VI  Cir  if  J&i  v> 


iAllah  burdens  not  a  person  beyond  his  scope.  He  gets  reioard 
far  that  (good)  which  he  has  earned,  and  he  is  punished  far  that 
(evil)  which  he  has  earned.  " Our  Lord!  Punish  us  not  if  we 
forget  or  fall  into  error”.} 

Allah  said,  ‘I  shall  (accept  your  supplication),’ 


&  Oi  ZS  jJc  % 


i”Our  Lord!  Lay  not  on  us  a  burden  like  that  which  You  did 
lay  on  those  before  us  (fezvs  and  Christians )”} 

Allah  said,  ‘I  shall  (accept  your  supplication),’ 
i*H  GWiCCiZS  v; 


i”Our  Lord!  Put  not  on  us  a  burden  greater  than  we  have 
strength  to  bear.”)* 


Allah  said,  1  shall  (accept  your  supplication),’ 


H  /Jti  £  UjLiiU  CGy 


'J  VZ&  U  ^  GZfo 


i”Pardon  us  and  grant  us  forgiveness.  Have  mercy  on  us.  You 
are  our  Mawla  (Supporter  and  Protector)  and  give  us  victory 
over  the  disbelieving  people. "} 

Allah  said,  1  shall.’  ”121 

Imam  Ahmad  recorded  that  Mujahid  said,  “I  saw  Ibn  ‘Abbas 
and  said  to  him,  ‘O  Abu  Abbas!  I  was  with  Ibn  Umar,  and  he 


111  Ahmad  2:412. 
*2*  Muslim  1:115. 


99 


Surah  2.  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) 


read  this  Ayah  and  cried.’  He  asked,  Which  Ayah?’  I  said, 


'J  C  ijlj 


'iAnd  whether  you  disclose  lohat  is  in  yourselves  or  conceal 

ity 

Ibn  ‘Abbas  said,  When  this  Ayah  was  revealed,  it  was  very 
hard  on  the  Companions  of  the  Messenger  of  Allah  and 
worried  them  tremendously.  They  said:  O  Messenger  of  Allah! 
We  know  that  we  would  be  punished  according  to  our 
statements  and  our  actions,  but  as  for  what  occurs  in  our 
hearts,  we  do  not  control  what  is  in  them.’  The  Messenger  of 
Allah  sg  said, 

bUaLIj  ^ A* 


8  Say,  'We  hear  and  xue  obey 

They  said,  We  hear  and  we  obey.’  Thereafter,  this  Ayah 
abrogated  the  previous  Ayah, 

Jt  A  M 


iThe  Messenger  believes  in  what  has  been  sent  down  to  him 
from  his  Lord,  and  (so  do)  the  believers.  Each  one  believes  in 
Alldli},  until, 


T  c  l Vi  lli  £T  J&Z 


iAIIdh  burdens  not  a  person  beyond  his  scope.  He  gets  reivard 
for  that  (good)  which  he  has  earned,  and  he  is  punished  for  that 
(evil)  which  he  has  earned.} 


Therefore,  they  were  pardoned  what  happens  in  their  hearts, 
and  were  held  accountable  only  for  their  actions.’”1 11 

The  Group  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


j l  y>z  I <  aj  ^  iill  j|D 


*  Allah  has  pardoned  my  Ummah  for  lohat  they  say  to 
themselves,  as  long  as  they  do  not  utter  it  or  act  on  it  .»|2* 


111  Ahmad  1 :332. 

121  Fath  Al-Bari  9:300,  Muslim  1 : 1 17 ,  Abu  Dawud  2:657,  Tuhfat  Al- 
Ahutadhi  4:361 ,  An-Nasal  6:156,  Ibn  Majah  1  :658. 


100 


Tafofr  !M  Kathir 


The  Two  Sahihs  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 


Ijlj  iJili  Ifiu *  4*JU  li|  :ajl  Jli' 

•i U^sii  iii  /ZzJ-  U*Su  jUi 


«A//«/i  said  (to  His  angels),  "If  My  servant  intends  to  commit 
an  evil  deed,  do  not  record  it  as  such  for  him,  and  if  he 
commits  it,  write  it  for  him  as  one  evil  deed.  If  he  intends  to 
perform  a  good  deed,  but  did  not  perform  it,  then  write  it  for 
him  as  one  good  deed,  and  if  he  performs  it,  zorite  it  for  him  as 
ten  good  deeds. "»[11 


V  ■* ait  *4 uy  Jyji  Vaj 

h  ><  XJj'\  ^jcjij  C >j  *sL<jtt.  “££\'j  iSLl  'ijJ-j  o*  <2?  iyo 

ji  tSLi*i  v  C2;  U3T  C  ^C^2T  C  c*j  ^  Ci  'if 

•j;  e;  u5  «  ^ji  ji  ^  c?  ^  ts  %  ££  kl  ji 

^jiK  j*  t _ J tu»ylj  U  jii'j  li*  -a  U  Ajlli  ^  li  l.il'ij 


4285.  The  Messenger  believes  in  what  has  been  sent  down  to 
him  from  his  Lord,  and  (so  do)  the  believers.  Each  one  believes 
in  Allah,  His  Angels,  His  Books,  and  His  Messengers.  (They 
say,)  "We  make  no  distinction  between  one  another  of  His 
Messengers"  -  and  they  say,  "We  hear,  and  we  obey.  (We 
seek)  Your  forgiveness,  our  Lord,  and  to  You  is  the  return  (of 
all).") 

4286.  Allah  burdens  not  a  person  beyond  his  scope.  He  gets 
reward  for  that  (good)  which  he  has  earned,  and  he  is  punished 
for  that  (evil)  which  he  has  earned.  "Our  Lord!  Punish  us  not 
if  we  forget  or  fall  into  error,  our  Lord!  Lay  not  on  us  a  burden 
like  that  which  You  did  lay  on  those  before  us  (Jews  and 
Christians);  our  Lord!  Put  not  on  us  a  burden  greater  than  we 
have  strength  to  bear.  Pardon  us  and  grant  us  forgiveness. 
Have  mercy  on  us.  You  are  our  Mawla  (Patron,  Supporter  and 
Protector)  and  give  us  victory  over  the  disbelieving  people") 


m  Fath  Al-B&ri  13 :473 ,  Muslim  1:117. 


Surah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) _ 101 

The  Hadiths  on  the  Virtue  of  These  Two  Ayat,  May  Allah 
Benefit  Us  by  Them 

Al-Bukhari  recorded  that  Abu  Mas'ud  said  that  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  sg  said, 

J  YJ&  '? 

« Whoever  recites  the  last  txvo  Ayat  in  Surat  Al-Baqarah  at 
night,  they  will  suffice  for  him.** 11 

The  rest  of  the  six  also  recorded  similar  wording  for  this 
Hadith.12*  The  Two  Sahihs  recorded  this  Hadith  using  various 
chains  of  narration,*3'  and  Imam  Ahmad  also  recorded  it.*4* 
Muslim  recorded  that  ‘Abdullah  said,  “When  the  Messenger 
of  Allah  went  on  the  Isra  journey,  he  ascended  to  the  Sidrat 
Al-Muntaha *s*  in  the  sixth  heaven,  where  whatever  ascends 
from  the  earth  ends  at,  and  whatever  descends  from  above  it 
ends  at. 

Hill?*  6  vJyi  & 

iWheti  that  covered  the  lote  tree  which  did  cover  it!}  [53:16] 
meaning,  a  mat  made  of  gold. 

The  Messenger  of  Allah  jfe  was  then  given  three  things:  the 
five  prayers,  the  last  Ayat  in  Surat  Al-Baqarah  and  forgiveness 
for  whoever  did  not  associate  anything  or  anyone  with  Allah 
from  his  l/mmah."*6* 

Earlier  we  mentioned  the  Hadith  regarding  the  virtues  of 
Surat  Al-Fatihah  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas  which  stated,  “While  the 
Messenger  of  Allah  jg  was  with  Jibfil,  he  heard  a  noise  from 
above.  Jibfil  lifted  his  sight  to  the  sky  and  said,  This  is  a  door 
that  was  opened  just  now  in  heaven,  and  it  was  never  opened 
before.’  An  angel  came  down  through  the  door  to  the  Prophet 
and  said,  ‘Receive  the  good  news  of  two  lights  that  you  have 

*‘*  Path  Al-Bari  8 :672 . 

*2*  Muslim  1:555,  Abu  Dawud  2:118,  Tuhfat  Al-Ahwadhi  8:188,  An- 
Nasal  in  Al-Kubrd  5 : 14 ,  Ibn  Majah  1 :435 . 

*3*  Fath  Al-Bari  8 :7 12 ,  7 :369 ,  Muslim  1 :554 . 

*4*  Ahmad  4:118. 

*5*  Lote-tree  of  the  utmost  boundary,  beyond  which  none  can  pass. 

*6*  Muslim  1:157. 


2  02 


Tafsir  Ibn  Kathir 


been  given  and  which  no  Prophet  before  you  was  given:  the 
Opener  of  the  Book  ( Al-Fatihah )  and  the  last  Ayat  in  Surat  Al- 
Baqarah.  You  will  not  read  a  letter  of  them,  but  you  will  be 
granted  its  benefit.’”  This  Hadith  was  collected  by  Muslim  and 
An-Nasa’i,11’  and  this  is  the  wording  collected  by  An-Nasal. 

The  Tafsir  of  the  Last  Two  Ayat  of  Surat  Al-Baqarah 


Allah  said, 

^  «  P  v  .*ij5  *46  -gfr 


{Each  one  believes  in  Allah,  His  Angels,  His  Books,  and  His 
Messengers.  (They  say,)  "We  make  no  distinction  between  one 
another  of  His  Messengers .  "} 

Therefore,  each  of  the  believers  believes  that  Allah  is  the  One 
and  Only  and  the  Sustainer,  there  is  no  deity  worthy  of 
worship  except  Him  and  there  is  no  Lord  except  Him.  The 
believers  also  believe  in  all  Allah’s  Prophets  and  Messengers, 
in  the  Books  that  were  revealed  from  heaven  to  the 
Messengers  and  Prophets,  who  are  indeed  the  servants  of 
Allah.  Further,  the  believers  do  not  differentiate  between  any 
of  the  Prophets,  such  as,  believing  in  some  of  them  and 
rejecting  others.  Rather,  all  of  Allah’s  Prophets  and  Messengers 
are,  to  the  believers,  truthful,  righteous,  and  they  were  each 
guided  to  the  path  of  righteousness,  even  when  some  of  them 
bring  what  abrogates  the  Law  of  some  others  by  Allah’s  leave. 
Later  on,  the  Law  of  Muhammad,  the  Final  Prophet  and 
Messenger  from  Allah,  abrogated  all  the  laws  of  the  Prophets 
before  him.  So  the  Last  Hour  will  commence  while 
Muhammad’s  Law  remains  the  only  valid  Law,  and  all  the 
while  a  group  of  his  Ummah  will  always  be  on  the  path  of 
truth,  apparent  and  dominant.  Allah’s  statement, 


iAnd  they  say,  “We  hear,  and  we  obey''}  means,  we  heard  Your 
statement,  O  our  Lord,  comprehended  and  implemented  it,  and 
adhered  to  its  implications. 

ic: 


i(We  seek)  Your  forgiveness,  our  Lord}  contains  a  plea  and 
Muslim  1 :554,  An-Nasa’i  in  Al-Kubra  5:12. 


103 


Surah  2 ,  Al-Baqarah  (Part-3) . . . 

supplication  for  Allah’s  forgiveness,  mercy  and  kindness. 

Allah’s  statement, 

VI  CJS  'if  v} 

AAllah  burdens  not  a  person  beyond  his  scope}  means,  Allah  does 
not  ask  a  soul  what  is  beyond  its  ability.  This  only 
demonstrates  Allah’s  kindness,  compassion  and  generosity 
towards  His  creation.  This  Ayah  is  the  Ayah  that  abrogated  the 
Ayah  that  worried  the  Companions,  that  is,  Allah’s  statement, 

-4  U  f&S  j\j} 

iAnd  xohether  you  disclose  what  is  in  yourselves  or  conceal  it, 
Allah  will  call  you  to  account  for  it.} 

This  indicates  that  although  Allah  will  question  His  servants 
and  judge  them.  He  will  only  punish  for  what  one  is  able  to 
protect  himself  from.  As  for  what  one  cannot  protect  himself 
from,  such  as  what  one  says  to  himself  -  or  passing  thoughts 
-  they  will  not  be  punished  for  that.  We  should  state  here  that 
to  dislike  the  evil  thoughts  that  cross  one’s  mind  is  a  part  of 
faith.  Allah  said  next, 

4-: 

A  He  gets  reward  for  that  which  he  has  earned}  of  good, 

4  -i  f  c  \f&f} 

iAnd  he  is  punished  for  that  which  he  has  earned}  of  evil,  that  is, 
concerning  the  acts  that  one  is  responsible  for. 

Allah  then  said,  [mentioning  what  the  believers  said]  while 
directing  His  servants  to  supplicate  to  Him,  all  the  while 
promising  them  that  He  will  answer  their  supplication: 

i"Our  Lord!  Push  us  not  ifwe  forget  or  fall  into  error 

meaning,  wIf  we  forgot  an  obligation  or  fell  into  a  prohibition, 
or  made  an  error  while  ignorant  of  its  ruling.”  We  mentioned 
the  Hadith  by  Abu  Hurayrah,  that  Muslim  collected,  wherein 
Allah  said,  WI  shall  (accept  your  supplication).^11  There  is  also 
the  Hadith  by  Ibn  ‘Abbas  that  Allah  said,  “I  did  (accept  your 

m 


Muslim  1 : 1 15 . 


104 


Tafstr  Ibn  Kathir 


supplication).”111 


&  os  cr  1^1  '\LS  £$> 


40«r  Lord!  Lay  not  on  us  a  burden  like  that  which  You  did  lay 
on  those  before  us  (Jews  and  Christians),} 

means,  “Even  if  we  were  able  to  perform  them,  do  not  require 
us  to  perform  the  difficult  deeds  as  You  required  the  previous 
nations  before  us,  such  as  the  burdens  that  were  placed  on 
them.  You  sent  Your  Prophet  Muhammad  jg,  the  Prophet  of 
mercy,  to  abrogate  these  burdens  through  the  Law  that  You 
revealed  to  him,  the  Hanlfi  (Islamic  Monotheism),  easy  religion.” 
Muslim  recorded  that  Abu  Hurayrah  said  that  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  jg  said  that  Allah  said,  “I  shall  (accept  your 

supplication).”121  Ibn  ‘Abbas  narrated  that  the  Messenger  of 
Allah  sg  said  that  Allah  said,  “1  did  (accept  your 

supplication).”131  There  is  the  Hadith  recorded  through  various 
chains  of  narration  that  the  Messenger  of  Allah  jg  said, 

lyvLDl  t&SL 

"I  was  sent  with  the  easy  Hanifiyyah  way  .»141 

i-n  r3  a;} 


iOur  Lord!  Put  not  on  us  a  burden  greater  than  we  have 
strength  to  bear} 

of  obligations,  hardships  and  afflictions,  do  not  make  us  bear 
what  we  cannot  bear  of  this. 

4?*  u  Xu,  icazt  r3  £> 

iOur  Lord!  Put  not  on  us  a  burden  greater  than  we  have 
strength  to  bear.} 

We  mentioned  that  Allah  said,  “I  shall  (accept  your 
supplication)”151  in  one  narration,  and,  “I  did  (accept  your 
supplication),”  in  another  narration. 

111  Muslim  1 :1 16. 

121  Muslim  1 : 1 15 . 

131  Muslim  1 : 1 16 . 

141  Ahmad  5:266,  6:116,233.  These  are  references  for  similar 
wordings .  The  first  is  also  recorded  by  Al-Humaydi ,  see  As-Sahthah 
1829,2924. 

151  Ibn  Abi  Hatim  3  :1235. 


Silrah  2 .  Al-Baqarah  ( Part-3 ) 


105 


4^ 

^Pardon  us$>  meaning,  between  us  and  You  regarding  what  You 
know  of  our  shortcomings  and  errors. 

iAtid  grant  us  forgiveness  >  concerning  what  is  between  us  and 
Your  servants.  So  do  not  expose  our  errors  and  evil  deeds  to  them. 

iHave  mere y  on  in  what  will  come  thereafter.  Therefore,  do 

not  allow  us  to  fall  into  another  error.  They  say  that  those  who 
commit  error  need  three  things:  Allah’s  forgiveness  for  what  is 
between  Him  and  them,  that  He  conceals  these  errors  from  His 
other  servants,  and  thus  does  not  expose  them  before  the 
servants,  and  that  He  grants  them  immunity  from  further 
error.”  We  mentioned  before  that  Allah  answered  these  pleas,  “I 
shall,”  in  one  narration  and,  “1  did,”  in  another  narration. 

iYou  are  our  Mawla}  meaning,  You  are  our  supporter  and 
helper,  our  trust  is  in  You,  You  are  sought  for  each  and  every 
type  of  help  and  our  total  reliance  is  on  You.  There  is  no  power 
or  strength  except  from  You. 

iAtid  give  us  victory  over  the  disbelieving  people } 

those  who  rejected  Your  religion,  denied  Your  Oneness, 
refused  the  Message  of  Your  Prophet  sg,  worshipped  other  than 
You  and  associated  others  in  Your  worship.  Give  us  victory  and 
make  us  prevail  above  them  in  this  and  the  Hereafter.  Allah 
said,  “I  shall,”  in  one  narration,  and,  “I  did,”  in  the  Hadith  that 
Muslim  collected  from  Ibn  ‘Abbas. 

Further,  Ibn  Jarir  recorded  that  Abu  Ishaq  said  that 
whenever  Mu‘adh  would  finish  reciting  this  Surah, 

iAnd  give  us  victory  over  the  disbelieving  people},  he  would  say 
“Amin.”111 


U1 


At-Tabari  6 :146. 


Surah  3.  A[  '